                                 E
                               QUI
                                VA
                              LENCE
                                RE
                                LA
                              TIONS
         AND THE CATEGORIZATION OF MATHEMATICAL OBJECTS


                                          ANTON DOCHTERMANN



        Abstract. In [2] Lakoff and Nuñez develop a basis for the cognitive science of embodied math-
        ematics. For them, the abstract concepts and reasonings of mathematics are grounded in the
        conceptual processes that we develop in our interaction with the physical world. Through the
        use of conceptual metaphor these cognitive devices are projected to the realm of mathematical
        reasoning. In this paper we employ the methods spelled out in [2] to make a thorough study of
        the equivalence relation, a particular mathematical object. In particular we identify the primary
        cognitive metaphors at play in the conception and understanding of the equivalence relation
        and discuss some examples. The equivalence relation is a fundamental object in all branches of
        mathematics and, although a relatively simple construction, its cognitive analysis proves to be
        a rich source of cognitive methaphors and conceptual blending.




                                             1. Introduction

       Categorization is a process that plays an important role in our everyday lives. Much of
human abstract thinking, and cognition in general, is involved in the process of categorizing. Be it
objects, concepts, etc., we seem to make sense of the world by creating little boxes in which to place
various divisions of it. The inclination to categorize is apparent at a very early age; it is a feature
of the way that we interact in our daily lives with the objects that surround us. Categorization is
part of our experience.

       One of the earliest and historically most influential theories of human categorization dates
back to the Classical Theory of Aristotle. The Classical Theory supposes that every category can
be defined by a list of necessary and sufficient conditions. A particular mental object is in the
category if and only if it fulfills these conditions. The members of a category, then, are precisely
those objects that possess each of these conditions [1]. For Lakoff, the Classical Theory is an ‘expert
version’ of a more general Folk Theory of Essences that influences much of Western thought. In
that theory, it is assumed that every specific thing is a type of thing (i.e., can be categorized), and

  Date: April 5, 2011.
                                                       1
2                                      ANTON DOCHTERMANN


that the conditions that define a particular category are inherent properties that the members of
the classes possess [2]. These assumptions are inherent in the Classical Theory of categorization.

      Although more recent experiments and theories strongly suggest that the Classical Theory
does not fit the way that we use classes in everyday language (see Appendix), along with the Folk
Theory of Essences, it does influence that way that we conceptualize the notion of a categorization.
In other words, it influences the way we think about categorization.


                2. The ‘Complete’ Categorizations of Physical Objects

       The cognitive process of abstract categorization is grounded in our experiences with cate-
gorizing physical objects in our spatio-temporal experience. Dogs, cats, tress, apples; these are
the first categories that we learn. To understand the cognitive processes involved in categorizing
mathematical objects, then, we must first investigate the structure of physical object categoriza-
tions.

       As we have seen, the Folk Theory of Essences motivates the way that we conceptualize the
process of categorization. Inherent in this theory is the assumption that ‘every specific thing is
a kind of thing’ [2]. To borrow Lakoff’s example, there are kinds of animals: dogs, cats, birds,
etc., and each specific animal is a kind of animal. This is a categorization of physical objects:
animals from our real world experiences are categorized into a finite number of ‘different kinds’ of
animals (dogs, cats, etc.). Again, the Folk Theory of Essences tells us that each specific instance
of animal fits into one of our categories; this includes instances of animals that we may or may not
encounter in our experience. Inherent in the cognitive interpretation of the categorization, then,
is the conception of the totality of animals. In other words, our categorization is understood as a
complete categorization.

        This presumption is not trivial. In reality, our preconceived categories give us only the
potential for a complete categorization, at best. It requires additional cognitive apparatus to
conceptualize a particular categorization as complete. The notion of completeness is inherent in
all of the cognitive categorizations that we make, and, as we will see, it plays a significant role in
the cognitive classification of mathematical objects.

2.1. Finite Collection Categorization. In some ways, our notion of the completeness of a
categorization is a consequence of the Folk Theory of Essences, but I would also argue that it
comes as an entailment of a cognitive metaphor that we use to ground general categorizations.
Our real world experiences with categorization involve finite collections of physical objects, and
each of these experiences has a general structure to them: we are given (or construct) categories to
place the objects, we place the objects accordingly, and we understand that the process is ‘done’
when all of the objects have been placed.

       A child is given a bowl of fruit and is told to sort them into piles of apples, oranges, and
pears. Inherent in this process of categorization is the understanding that each object in the bowl
belongs to exactly one category of fruit (otherwise, we would not have given her the task). For the
  E   QUI   VA   LENCE   RE   LA   TIONS   AND THE CATEGORIZATION OF MATHEMATICAL OBJECTS 3


child, categorization is complete when each fruit from the original collection has been placed in the
appropriate pile. In the case of finite collections of this kind, categorization involves well-defined
categories such that no object can belong to more than one category at any one time (again, if the
categories were ambiguous, we would not have given her the task). We understand that when our
categorization is complete, each object sits in exactly one category.

      Much of our early education is occupied with these finite collection categorizations, and it is
from these experiential schemas that we metaphorically conceptualize the notion of categorization
in general. Here is the structure of that metaphor:

                           The Complete Categorization Metaphor
                 Source Domain                        Target Domain
                 Categorizations of finite collec-    General object categorizations
                 tions of objects
                 Categories to place objects          Preconceived categories
                 Each object is placed in a cate-     Each thing is in a category
                 gory
                 Entailment 1: Categorization is      All things are categorized
                 done when all objects are placed
                 in an appropriate category
                 Entailment 2: When the catego-       Each thing is in exactly one cat-
                 rization is done, each object sits   egory
                 in exactly one category
                 Entailment 3: The collection of      There is a class of things catego-
                 things given to categorize           rized


                     3. The Conflation of Categorization and Classes

       In our real world experiences with finite object collection categorizations, we are given a
collection of objects to categorize. As we have seen, this process schema grounds our conception of
general object categorizations. An entailment of this conceptual metaphor is the notion that our
categories sit inside a class of objects to be completely categorized. In other words, the Complete
Categorization Metaphor induces a conflation of cognitive processes: the cognitive activity of
categorizing conflates with our conceptualization of a class.

        The concept of a class, then, is intimately linked to the process of categorization in our
everyday experience. Note that the class conception is not linked to the categories themselves;
rather, it is the class of totality of objects that are classified. We will see that the conception of
a class at this level is significant to the classification of mathematical objects. However, we must
first investigate the cognitive operations involved in the conceptualization of a class.

3.1. Classes. As Lakoff argues, the concept of a class is experientially grounded via the ‘Classes
are Containers’ metaphor. Let us emphasize here that by ‘class’ we do not mean the mathematical
4                                       ANTON DOCHTERMANN


notion of a collection of sets used in set theory, but rather the construction of the more general
cognitive notion. We conceptualize classes in terms of container schemas: elements of a particular
class are objects in a container. The interior of the container constitutes the elements of a class, the
exterior the nonelements. We use these mental container schemas in ‘perceiving, conceptualizing,
and reasoning about our everyday experience’ [2].

        As we have seen, modern mathematics is an expression of the axiomatic method. A finite
number of axioms and definitions define the objects within a particular branch of math, and the
container schema metaphor is used to conceptualize the class of these objects. At their face value,
however, a finite list of axioms and definitions cannot provide any sort of collection of objects. At
best, the axioms and definitions give us a way to ‘check’ a particular object’s properties against a
list of criteria.

       We need an additional metaphor to cognitively understand the list of criteria as actually
constituting a class of objects. Again, we turn to the Folk Theory of Essences. As we have seen,
the Folk Theory tells us that every specific thing is a kind of thing. In addition, it assumes that
each thing has a collection of properties that makes it the kind of thing that it is, and that these
‘essences’ are in some sense causal they are inherent to that thing. The Folk Theory of Essences
motivates the Classes are Properties Metaphor:

                             The Classes are Properties Metaphor
                Source Domain                      Target Domain
                A List of Properties and the Folk Classes
                Theory of Essences
                Finite list of properties          Class C of objects with those
                                                   properties
                Object that has all of the prop- Object in the class C
                erties
                Object that does not have all of Object not in the class C
                the properties
                All objects have a list of proper- All objects are in some class
                ties that make them what they
                are
                We can compare our list with any All objects are in the class C or
                other list                         not in the class C

       Sometimes, a class of mathematical objects comes to us in a natural way (i.e., the integers
and rational numbers), and sometimes, given a list of axioms and definitions, we have to construct
the classes ourselves based on the desired properties via the Classes are Properties metaphor.


3.2. Sets. Only in the last century has the notion of a class of mathematical objects become a
focus of rigorous study. The axioms of set theory that describe formal classes of mathematical
objects are good indications of the cognitive metaphors inherent in the conception of these classes.
  E   QUI   VA    LENCE   RE   LA   TIONS   AND THE CATEGORIZATION OF MATHEMATICAL OBJECTS 5


First, we need ‘Boole’s Metaphor’ [2] to cognitively map an algebraic structure onto the domain of
classes (where the operations are union and intersection) to give us the well-known notions of an
empty class and a subclass. Next, we insist that sets can be members of other sets; that is, we must
conceive of them as objects in the same way that we understand elements of a class as objects.
The Sets are Objects metaphor [2] is fundamental to the cognitive conception of mathematical
sets, and, as we will see, to the application of the equivalence relation as well.




      4. Experience with Objects The Object Deconstruction Schema and the
                                Partition Entailment

        Object construction and deconstruction is an experientially derived schema that grounds
some of our most common conceptual metaphors (including the cognitive conception of number
[2]). The deconstruction of an object is the process of physically ‘splitting up’ an object into a
finite number of components. Like the slices of a loaf of bread, our experience tells us that these
components are physically independent of one another (are disjoint), and that the collection of
components (slices) taken as a whole constitutes the entire object (the loaf).

        Now, as we have seen, a feature of the conceptual blend that describes our cognitive under-
standing of a set of mathematical objects is the metaphor that sets are objects. This metaphor,
blended with the object deconstruction/construction schema, provides us with the cognitive un-
derstanding of a ‘partition’ of a set. In first order logical terms, a partition P of a set S is a set of
nonempty subsets of A that are disjoint and exhaustive; i.e., no two different sets in P have any
common elements, and each element of A is in some set of P. This definition makes sense in terms
of our grounding metaphors for a set. If a set is an object in our spatial-temporal experience,
then, we have the ability to ‘cut’ it up into disjoint pieces like the slices of a loaf of bread. Again,
we understand that each ‘slice’ is physically independent (disjoint), and also that the collection of
slices constitute the whole set.

                 The Sets are Objects Metaphor and the Partition Entailment
                  Source Domain                        Target Domain
                  Objects                              Sets
                  Objects can be cut up into parts     Sets can be partitioned
                  A physical slice of the object       A nonempty subset, constituting
                                                       a member of the partition
                  Each slice is physically indepen-    Each subset is disjoint (do not
                  dent                                 share elements)
                  The totality of the slices consti-   The union of the subsets is the
                  tute the whole object                set

      A typical way to visualize partitions of sets is to draw the set as a circle and to divided the
space up into boxes:
6                                       ANTON DOCHTERMANN


        These representations are a good indication that the inherent Sets are Containers metaphor
is also playing a role in our cognitive understanding of a partition. It is interesting to note, however,
that the physical location of the ‘slices’ in this representation is not an entailment; we can partition
a set in ways that may not coincide with out graphical notation of it. It is also worth noting that we
are not restricted to finite sets or even finite partitions; grounded in the domain of finite physical
containers/objects, we can use the Basic Metaphor of Infinity [2] to conceptualize a partition with
an infinite number of elements.

                5. The ‘Categorization of a Set is a Partition Metaphor’

       As we have seen, the cognitive process of a categorization brings with it the conceptualization
of a class of objects to be categorized. Also, we saw that our understanding of a categorization is
grounded in our experience with finite collections of objects through the Complete Categorization
metaphor. Entailment 2 of this metaphor grounded our notion that, in a categorization, a particular
object is in exactly one category. This means that the categories are disjoint in the same way that
a partition of a set provides a set of disjoint subsets; remember that this came as an entailment of
the Sets are Objects Metaphor. But, cognitively speaking, a mathematical set is also grounded in
the same container schemas that provide us with classes. In other words, the cognitive conception
of a categorization and that of a mathematical set are linked to the same grounding schemas.
At the same time, we have a property of one conception that correlates to property of the other
(namely, the disjointness of partitions and of categories). Again, there is a conflation of cognitive
processes that results in the Categorization of a Set is a Partition metaphor cognitively, we begin
to think of the categorization of a set as a partition.

5.1. Partitions and Relations. In most cases, a certain collection of mathematical objects that
we wish to investigate forms an infinite set, and even a coherent cognitive understanding of a
partition does not provide us with sufficient cognitive apparatus to construct a particular partition
of this set. As we have seen, the axioms and definitions of a particular branch of math provides
us with an infinite collection of mathematical objects (under the metaphor that Classes are Prop-
erties). The goal will be to categorize these objects in some meaningful way by constructing a
partition of the set (using the metaphor that Categorization of a Set is a Partition). Given an
infinite set, this is a difficult thing to formalize.

       Suppose instead that we start with a given partition on a set A (take A to be the set of
Natural numbers, a let our partition consist of the set of even numbers and the set of odd numbers).
Conceptually, we have taken the class of Natural numbers and cut it up so that each element is in
exactly one of two ‘little boxes’ (subsets). Now, suppose that we define a binary relation R on A
as follows: two elements (numbers) x and y are in the relation R (we will write xRy) if and only
if they are in the same ‘little box’. Immediately, we see that the relation R will have the following
three properties:

      R is Reflexive: for all x in A, xRx

      R is Symmetric: if xRy then yRx
  E   QUI   VA   LENCE   RE   LA   TIONS   AND THE CATEGORIZATION OF MATHEMATICAL OBJECTS 7


       R is Transitive: if xRy and yRz then xRz

5.2. The Equivalence Relation Definition and Properties. We call R an equivalence rela-
tion on a set A if R is a binary relation on A that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive (Enderton,
1977). Note that the understanding of a set is inherent in this definition; the cognitive conception
of the equivalence relation, then, is grounded in our conception of a set (that is why we spent the
time investigating sets).

       Now, in the effort to minimize our axioms and definitions, we understand that the three
properties of the equivalence relation are in fact independent; if one of them was derivable from
the other two, then we could not define a binary relation on a set that had the other two but not
it. And perhaps the best way to understand each of the three properties and their consequences
is to examine relations that have exactly one of them lacking:

       A Reflexive and Symmetric, but not Transitive relation: consider the set of real numbers,
with the relation ‘having an absolute difference of 1 or less’. Now, the integers 2 and 3 are in
relation, as are 3 and 4, and yet 2 and 4, having a difference of 2 are NOT in relation. In real
analysis (the basis of calculus), the absolute difference is considered a metric on the set of real
numbers in that it fulfills the properties that we have axiomatized for a metric space. Having a
difference of 1 or less, then, is a metaphorical notion of ‘closeness’ within the realm of the set of
real numbers. It does not define an equivalence relation, however, because it is not transitive.

       A Reflexive and Transitive, but not Symmetric relation: consider the set of integers, with
the relation ‘is less than or equal to’. Now, 2 is in relation to 3, but 3 is NOT in relation to 2.
In this example, we can see that the anti-symmetric property ‘lines’ up the set of distinct integers
in increasing order. In fact, a binary relation that is antisymmetric and transitive is called ‘linear
ordering’, for good reason (Enderton, 1977).

       A Symmetric and Transitive, but not Reflexive relation: consider the set of integers, with
the relation ‘having the same natural log value’. Since the log function is not defined for negative
numbers, the relation is not reflexive. The reflexive property guarantees that the relation holds on
the entire set, and without it, we can not hope to form a partition of a set because some elements
will be missed.

5.3. Equivalence Classes and Partitions. We have shown how a partition on a set A can induce
an equivalence relation (the relation is simply ‘in the same box’). But, again, our goal is to formalize
a process of constructing a partition on a given set. It turns out that, under certain conceptual
metaphors, any relation on a set that is an equivalence relation induces a unique partition on a set.
In other words, the categorization of a set of mathematical objects is complete (metaphorically, of
course) when we define a relation on its that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.

       Suppose that we have an equivalence relation R on a set S. For a particular element x of
S, we define the ‘equivalence class of x’ (denoted [x]) as the set of elements in S that are in the
relation R with x. Next, take the collection E of all such equivalence classes. I claim that E
is a partition of the set (in the sense defined above). Because R is reflexive, we have that each
8                                       ANTON DOCHTERMANN


equivalence class is nonempty (the class [x] contains at least the element x) and is a subset of A
(because R is a binary relation on A). The main thing to check is that the collection of equivalence
classes is disjoint. The mathematical proof utilizes the symmetry and transitivity of the relation
R. Suppose on the contrary that [x] and [y] had some common element t. This means that xRt
and yRt (where, again, xRt denotes that x is in relation to t). By symmetry on yRt, this implies
tRy, and by transitivity, we have xRy. Now, let s be any element of [y]. We have then yRs, which
implies xRs by transitivity. This means that s is in [x] (by definition), which implies that [y] is
contained in [x] (since s was an arbitrary element of [y]). Since R is symmetric, we also have yRx
and we can reverse this last argument to conclude that [x] is contained in [y]. Finally, this gives us
that [x] = [y]; i.e., whenever two equivalence classes share a common element, they must on fact
be the same equivalence class.




5.4. The ‘Partitions are Defining Equivalence Relations’ Metaphor. According to the
mathematical proof outlined above, any equivalence relation R on a set S induces a unique partition
of that set. If we are to investigate the structure of the proof, we see that it involves quantification
over the set S; given any element x in our set S, we can show that it is in exactly one equivalence
class. Because this element was chosen arbitrarily, we conclude that each element of S is in
precisely one equivalence class; thus the collection of equivalence classes forms a partition. Now,
in the application of equivalence classes to a particular mathematical domain of objects, it will
be essential to think of a particular category (equivalence class) as a unique mathematical object
itself within a collection of class-objects. In other words, we need to have a conceptualization of
the entire class and of the entire collection.

       In the case of finite sets, we can apply a particular equivalence relation to a set of objects
to produce a complete partition in a relatively straightforward way: we pick the first element
out and place it in its own equivalence class; subsequent elements are classed according to their
relationship with chosen elements. At some point, the process is done and we have a partition of
the set. Typically, however, equivalence relations are defined on infinite sets, and the best we can
do is to show that, given any element x, x belongs to exactly one equivalence class. We need extra
cognitive apparatus to understand that this process actually gives us a complete partition with
complete object level classes. We need to apply the relation to all elements simultaneously, and
run each of them through the proof outline above, all at the same time, keeping track of which
elements went where and what each equivalence class looks like. It is a conceptual metaphor that
identifies our notion of an equivalence relation with that of a partition.



              The Partition is Defining an Equivalence Relation Metaphor
  E   QUI   VA   LENCE   RE   LA   TIONS   AND THE CATEGORIZATION OF MATHEMATICAL OBJECTS 9


                 Source Domain                       Target Domain
                 Defining an Equivalence Rela-       Partitions
                 tion
                 Set S of elements the relation is   Set S of elements to be parti-
                 defined on                          tioned
                 Two elements x and y are in a       Two elements x and y are in the
                 relation R                          same subset
                 Two elements y and z are not in     Two elements y and z are not in
                 relation R                          the same subset
                 Given any element of S, we can      The equivalence classes are
                 show that it belongs to exactly     nonempty, disjoint, and com-
                 one equivalence class               prise the whole set
                 Entailment 1: Defining an equiv-    Partitioning the set S
                 alence relation on S
                 Entailment 2: The structure of      The structure of the partition
                 the equivalence relation

      This metaphor is central to the cognitive understanding of the equivalence relation and its
application to sets of mathematical objects. The real power of the metaphor lies in the fact that
we are provided with a well-defined and discrete process of forming partitions of infinite sets of
mathematical objects. As we have seen, partitions of sets are conceptualized as categorizations,
and so, in essence, we now have a way to categorize mathematical objects.

       As an entailment of this metaphor, the cognitive understanding of the structure of a partic-
ular partition becomes an understanding of the equivalence relation that induces it. In our expe-
riences with finite object collections, a partition dies not require us to have any a priori knowledge
of the elements themselves, let alone the relationship between any two given elements. However,
correlation in our experience between the two domains motivate their metaphorical relationship.


5.5. A Partition is a Set. At this point, it might be instructive to consider the set theoretical
justification of a partition of a set A. First, for any element x of A, we have the equivalence class
[x] is a set by a subset axiom of set theory that guarantees the existence of subsets described by
certain first order logical predications. Furthermore, the collection of equivalence classes forms a
set because they form a subset of P(A), the power set of A (the set of all subsets of A); and by
the power set axiom, we have that P(A) is a set.


                      6. ‘Equivalence Classes are Objects’ Metaphor

      As we have seen, our notion of a set is grounded in our Boolean class conceptualization
along with the additional Sets are Objects metaphor. In our applications of equivalence relation
categorizations, as well as in set theoretical terms, equivalence classes are sets. The Equivalence
Classes are Objects metaphor, then, is in some ways a special case of the Sets are Objects metaphor.
10                                     ANTON DOCHTERMANN


The equivalence classes that are given to us by our particular relation are not collections of objects,
but rather mathematical objects themselves with ‘object-level’ properties.

6.1. Equivalence Classes are Objects.

          7. Instances of Equivalence Rtelations Grounding the Relations

       Formal mathemaics is concerned with investigating sets of mathemtaicl objects, and, as we
have see, those sets sometimes come naturally and are sometimes created metaphorically by a list
of properties. We are inclined to categorize these objects in specific ways, but the question remains:
what motivates these particular categorizations? We have seen how an equivalence realtion is the
metaphorical means of categorizing a set of mathematical objects by the partition that it induces.
The motivation behind a categorization, then, lies in the structure of the equivalence relation itself.

       Now, the cognitive advantage of categorizing a particualr set of objects is that we can
use the Sets are Objects metaphor to treat the category itself as a single mathematical object.
Within a particular domain of mathematics, all elements of the category are identified as instances
of the ‘same’ object. The equivalence relation that induces the categorization of a set, then, is a
characterization of the conceptual metaphors that govern our understanding of that set. Equivalent
elements of a set (members of a category, of an equivalence class) are determined by the metaphors
that ground our cognitive conceptualization of them. The cognitive conception of a categorization
is the cognitive justification of the equivalence realtion.

      Perhaps the best way to illustrate this process is to investigate the cognitive processes
invooved in some of the more fundamental instances of equivalence relations and categorizations.
Although equivlaence realtions pervade nearly all branches of formal mathematics, many relations
are not particular to ‘college level’ math; they are inherent in the way we understand some of the
most basic mathematical objects.

7.1. Rational Numbers. At an early stage in our mathematical education, we are told that the
numerals ‘2/3’ and ‘4/6’ designate the ‘same’ rational number; that in fact any given fraction
can be represented in a multitude of ways (6/9, 8/12, etc., are other candidates). We are given
a general rule: two rational numbers, a/b and c/d, are the same if and only if they satisfy the
equation: a * d = b * c. Here, we have made precise the rather abstruse notion of equality of
fractions in terms of a more familiar multiplication of integers. This is a rather deep and subtle
notion, and the fact that we can make the move at such an early age illustrates some of our most
basic cognitive handlings of mathematical obnjects.

       Now, we can easily see that the relation on the set of integers as desribed above is a binary
realtion that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. Thus, it is an equivlenace relation and we have
a metaphorical partition on the set of ratios of integers. As we have said all along, the power of
the equivalence realtion is that it allows us to think of the classes (categories) as the mathematical
obhjects. This is clear in the case of the rational numbers. The object 2/3, while simultaneously
representing 4/6, 6/9, etc., is cognitively understood as a single number, not as a collection of
  E    QUI   VA   LENCE    RE    LA   TIONS    AND THE CATEGORIZATION OF MATHEMATICAL OBJECTS 11


numbers or ratios. Each equivalence class is a rational number and the set of equivalence classes
is the set of rational numbers.

       When we say that ‘2/3 = 4/6’ as rational numbers, what we are really implicitly understand-
ing is that, for any two rational numbers a/b and c/d, we have defined a/b = c/d if and only if
ad=bc (notice that we understand ad=bc as equal result frames stating that the resulting number
obtained from the two products is the same). In a strictly cognitive sense, our understanding of
2/3 is distinct from that of 4/6, and we need extra cognitive apparatus to comprehend them as
‘equal’.

       As we have seen, the metaphors that ground equivalence relation categorizations tell us that
the structure of the categorization is described by the structure of the equivalence relation. In
many cases, the way that we define an equivalence relation on a class of mathematical objects is
motivated by the cognitive blending of the conceptual metaphors that we use to ground the objects
in our everyday experience. The equivalence relation that givers us the rational numbers is a good
example of this.

       As Lakoff argues, our conception of the rational numbers can be understood as a blend of
four distinct metaphors grounded in experiential schemas: object collection, object construction,
measuring sticks, and motion along a line. Within the domain of object construction, the notion of
2/3 is much different than that of 4/6 - in the one case we imagine a collection of two pieces, in the
other we have four. However, if we are to conceive of these numbers as points along a measured
line, we can indeed think of them as representing the sam value.

7.2. Bijections. A bijection from one set to another is a one-to-one and onto correspondence.
If we are to consider a set S of collections, and define a relation ‘in bijection with’, then we see
immediately that:

      (1) every collection is in bijection with itself (just take the identity mapping)
      (2) if a collection A is in bijection with B, then B is in bijection with A (every bijection has a
          bijective inverse)
      (3) if a collection A is in a bijection b1 with B, and B is in bijection b2 with C, then A is in
          bijection with C (consider b2 composed with b1)

       In other words, ‘in bijection with’ is an equivalence relation. The bijection correspondence
is used in many branches of math.

                                                 References
 [1] Ashby, F. G.;Perrin, N. A. (1988). Toward a unified theory of similarity and recognition. Psychological Review,
     95, 124–150.
 [2] George Lakoff and Rafael Núñez, 2000, Where Mathematics Comes From. Basic Books.
