Univalent Foundations and Set Theory

            Talk by Vladimir Voevodsky
from Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, NJ.

                   May 8, 2013




                         1
                      Univalent foundations

- are based on a class of formal deduction systems which we currently
refer to as homotopy type theories. These theories are extensions of
Martin-Lof type theories which are compatible with the univalent model.
The univalent model is that which connects univalent foundations with
set theoretic foundations and serves as means to ensure that the deduc-
tion systems which we construct are at least as consistent as ZFC.
The main difficulty in explaining univalent foundations lies in the fact
that type theories encompass a wide class of deduction systems which
currently does not have a generally accepted definition.


                                   2
                      Sentences of type systems

In a typical type system one works with four kinds of sentences:

                      x1 : T1, . . . , xn : Tn ⊢ T    type


                         x1 : T1, . . . , xn : Tn ⊢ t : T


                       x1 : T1, . . . , xn : Tn ⊢ T = T ′


                      x1 : T1, . . . , xn : Tn ⊢ t = t′ : T
where x1, . . . , xn are names of variables and T1, . . . , Tn, T, t, t′ are ex-
pressions of the system of expressions underlying the type system.
                                        3
                         Derivation rules

Type system is specified by the underlying system of expressions and a
collection of derivation rules which show which sentences are derivable
in the theory. For example most type systems would have the follow-
ing derivation rule for sentences of the second kind where the object
expression t starts with λ:
                           Γ, x : T ⊢ o : T ′
                                     ∏
                      Γ ⊢ λx : T, o : x : T, T ′
the following derivation rule for sentences of the first kind where the
type expression starts with Id:
                       Γ ⊢ o1 : T Γ ⊢ o2 : T
                        Γ ⊢ Id T o1 o2 type

                                   4
                                h-levels
May be the most important feature of homotopy type theories is the
notion of h-levels. Given a type expression T in context Γ and an object
n of type nat of natural numbers we can write a new type expression
isof hlevel n T in Γ. This expressions are defined inductively from the
standard type constructors as follows:
                               ∑          ∏
            isof hlevel 0 T =      x : T,    x′ : T, Id T, x, x′
                          ∏          ∏
 isof hlevel (1 + n) T =      x : T,    x′ : T, isof hlevel n (Id T, x, x′)
Proving that a type expression is of h-level n means constructing (in
a given context) of an object of type isof hlevel n T i.e. deriving a
sentence of the form

                         Γ ⊢ o : isof hlevel n T
                                     5
                          h-levels (cont.)
For example the type nat is provably of h-level 2 which intuitively cor-
responds to sets and the unit type and empty type are of h-level 1.
The univalent model suggests the following interpretation of types of
small h-levels:
Types of h-level 1 are propositions. Inhabited types of h-level 1 are
  provable propositions. Thus the proposition as types correspondence
  is modified in homotopy type theory by interpreting only types of
  h-level 1 as propositions.
Types of h-level 2 are sets. Thus most of mathematics deals with types
  of h-level 2 and their objects.
Types of h-level 3 correspond to groupoids. For example the collection
  of all finite groups in homotopy type theory is a type of h-level 3.

                                   6
                     Models of type theories

Equivalence classes of sentences of the first and second kind of a type
system T modulo the equivalence relations defined by sentences of the
third and the fourth kind are denoted Bn+1(T ) and B  en(T ) where n is
the length of the context. One also formally adds B0(T ) which contains
one element pt.
The properties of sentences such as their ability under substitution e.g.

                  Γ ⊢ o : S Γ, x : S, Γ′ ⊢ T type
                      Γ, Γ′[o/x] ⊢ T [o/x] type
define a number partial defined operations on Bn’s and Ben’s. With this
partially defined operations B-sets of a type theory form a model of a
quasi-algebraic theory.
                                    7
                Models of type theories (cont.)

Derivation rules of a type system add operations and equations to the
theory such that ultimately the system of B-sets or B-system of a type
theory becomes initial model of a complex quasi-algebraic theory. A
model of the type theory is a homomorphism from its B-system to an-
other B-system. Since under the right choice of operations B-sets of a
type system form an initial model of a theory constructing a model of
a type system is equivalent to constructing a B-system with a list of
additional operations and axioms.



                                  8
                 Models of type theories (cont.)

The key machinery for constructing such B-systems is the machinery
of categories with universes. Let C be a category and p : U e → U a
morphism. Let us fix a final object pt of C. Let us further fix for any
morphism f : X → U a pull-back square
                                      (q,f )
                             (X, f ) −−→ U   e
                            pX,f ↓           ↓p
                                         f
                               X         −→ U
and let us write (X, f1, . . . , fn) etc. for the obvious iterated construc-
tion.


                                     9
                   Models of type theories (cont.)

Now let Bn be the set of sequences (f1, . . . , fn) where f1 : pt → U
and fi+1 : (pt, f1, . . . , fi) → U and let B         en be the set of sequences
(f1, . . . , fn, g) where (f1, . . . , fn) is as before and g : (pt, f1, . . . , fn) →
f.
W
One easily constructs a B-system structure on these sets which is deter-
mined up to a canonical isomorphism by the equivalence class of (C, p).
Let us denote this B-structure as BB(C, p).




                                          10
                 Models of type theories (cont.)

Finally, when C is a locally cartesian closed category, various additional
type-theoretic structures of the B-sets corresponding to (C, p) can in all
the interesting cases we know of be obtained from natural structures
on the morphism p : W   f → W . For example the standard group of
structures which correspond to the introduction-elimination rules of the
dependent products are generated on BB(C, p) from a pair of morphisms
Pe and P such that the following square is pull-back:
                                         e −→
                                  e, U × U    Pe e
                       HomU (U                   U
                        e ,IdU ×p)↓
                  HomU (U                        ↓p
                      HomU (U    e , U × U ) −→
                                              P
                                                 U


                                    11
                          Univalent model

The current construction of the univalent model for type theory such as
that of Coq which assumes an infinite sequence of universes Ui : Ui+1
is based on C being the category of simplicial sets relative to ZFC with
ω + 2 universes.
The largest universe is used to define the set of objects of the category
of simplicial sets. The next smaller one is used to define

                                e→U
                              p:U



                                   12
                      Univalent model (cont.)

The formal definition of p : U  e → U is as follows. The set Un of n-
simplexes of U is the set of isomorphism classes of Kan fibrations X →
∆n given together with well-orderings on the sets Xn and such that all
Xn belongs to one of the universes U0, . . . , Ui, . . ..
It is easy to see that p itself is a Kan fibration. A much less trivial fact
is that U is a Kan simplicial set and that p is a univalent fibration.




                                     13
                       Univalent model (cont.)

In the univalent model a sentence x1 : T1, . . . , xn : Tn ⊢ T            type is
interpreted as a tower of fibrations of (Kan) simplicial sets

          [T1, . . . , Tn, T ] → [T1, . . . , Tn] → . . . → [T1] → [pt]
and a sentence x1 : T1, . . . , xn : Tn ⊢ t : T as a section

                    [t] : [T1, . . . , Tn] → [T1, . . . , Tn, T ]
of the first fibration in this tower.


                                         14
                      Univalent model (cont.)

In particular a type expression in the empty context ⊢ T type is
interpreted as a Kan simplicial set and an object of a type in the empty
context ⊢ t : T as a point of the Kan simplicial set corresponding to T .
The standard constructors are interpreted as follows:
     ∏
 1. [ x : T, T ′] = the simplicial set of sections of the fibration [T, T ′] → [T ]
     ∑
 2. [ x : T, T ′] = [T, T ′]
 3. [Id T o1 o2] = simplicial paths from [o1] to [o2] in [T ]
 4. [nat] - the usual set of natural numbers considered as a simplicial
    set.


                                     15
                      Univalent model (cont.)

Most importantly for a universe Ui of the type theory the interpretation
[Ui] is the simplicial subset of U such that the set of n-simplxes (Ui)n is
the set of fibrations X → ∆n such that for each m the set of m-simplexes
Xm of X is in the set-theoretic universe number i. If we define U ei as the
sentence X : Ui ⊢ X type then the obvious projection [U      ei] → [Ui] is
the universal Kan fibration with fibers in the i-th universe.




                                    16
                     Univalent model (cont.)

One verifies relatively easily that the univalent model maps h-levels of
types to levels of homotopy types as follows:

 1. types of h-level 0 map to contractible simplicial sets
 2. types of h-level 1 map to simplicial sets which are homotopy equiv-
    alent to either a point or to the empty set
 3. types of h-level 2 map to simplicial sets which are homotopy equiv-
    alent to sets
 4. types of h-level n+2 map to simplicial sets representing homotopy
    n-types.


                                    17
                      Current developments

Currently we are developing new type theories more complicated than
the standard Martin-Lof type theory and at the same time more conve-
nient for practical formalization of complex mathematics.
Such type theories may easily have over a hundred derivation rules. Thus
a careful and formalizable approach is needed to show that the newly
constructed type theory is at least as consistent as ZFC with a given
structure of universes.
More precisely we need to be able to formally show that the univalent
model extends to these new theories.


                                   18
                  Current developments (cont.)

The first step in the development of the machinery which one needs
to be able to verify such statements is Initiality Theorem. The theorem
should state that the B-sets of a type system with given set of derivation
rules form the initial model of an extension of the quasi-algebraic theory
of B-systems extended by operations and equations which are formally
read from the derivation rules.
So far we do not have even a proper formulation of such a result but all
our experience shows that it is possible and that we are moving in the
direction where we will be able to state and prove it.



                                    19
                 Current developments (cont.)

The second step in the development of such a machinery should be Op-
erations Theorem which shows how to obtain operations of the kind
considered in the Initiality Theorem on B-systems BB(C, p) for locally
Cartesian closed categories from structures on p formulated in the in-
ternal language of locally Cartesian closed categories. This step is also
becoming intuitively more clear. In this step in particular the ideas and
language of LF (Logical Framework) appear in a very suggestive way.




                                   20
                             Conclusion

In my vision the more and more complex homotopy type theories will be-
come the languages in which practical unified formalization of all math-
ematics is done. The set theory will remain the most important bench-
mark of consistency. The theory of interpretations of type theories in
set-theoretic objects will be formalized in relatively simple type theo-
ries and each new addition to the practical language will require formal
”certification” by showing, through formally constructed interpretation,
that it is at least as consistent as ZFC.
                                   21
