                                                        SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES


                                                           PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN




arXiv:1705.07088v2 [math.LO] 5 Mar 2019
                                                    Abstract. Higher inductive types are a class of type-forming rules, introduced
                                                    to provide basic (and not-so-basic) homotopy-theoretic constructions in a type-
                                                    theoretic style. They have proven very fruitful for the “synthetic” development
                                                    of homotopy theory within type theory, as well as in formalizing ordinary
                                                    set-level mathematics in type theory. In this article, we construct models of a
                                                    wide range of higher inductive types in a fairly wide range of settings.
                                                        We introduce the notion of cell monad with parameters: a semantically-
                                                    defined scheme for specifying homotopically well-behaved notions of structure.
                                                    We then show that any suitable model category has weakly stable typal initial
                                                    algebras for any cell monad with parameters. When combined with the local
                                                    universes construction to obtain strict stability, this specializes to give models
                                                    of specific higher inductive types, including spheres, the torus, pushout types,
                                                    truncations, the James construction, and general localisations.
                                                        Our results apply in any sufficiently nice Quillen model category, including
                                                    any right proper, simplicially locally cartesian closed, simplicial Cisinski model
                                                    category (such as simplicial sets) and any locally presentable locally cartesian
                                                    closed category (such as sets) with its trivial model structure. In particular,
                                                    any locally presentable locally cartesian closed (∞, 1)-category is presented by
                                                    some model category to which our results apply.



                                                                                      Contents
                                             1. Introduction                                                                                 2
                                             2. Good model categories                                                                        6
                                             3. Coproducts                                                                                   8
                                             4. Pushouts in model categories                                                                10
                                             5. Pushouts in comprehension categories                                                        11
                                             6. Pushouts in type theory                                                                     15
                                             7. Natural numbers                                                                             21
                                             8. W-types                                                                                     24
                                             9. A higher inductive type not constructible from pushouts                                     26
                                             10. Propositional truncation                                                                   28
                                             11. Cell monads                                                                                32
                                             12. Cell monads with parameters                                                                38
                                             13. Summary                                                                                    48
                                             References                                                                                     48

                                             This material is based on research sponsored by The United States Air Force Research Laboratory
                                          under agreement number FA9550-15-1-0053. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and
                                          distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon.
                                          The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the author and should not be interpreted
                                          as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the
                                          United States Air Force Research Laboratory, the U.S. Government, or Carnegie Mellon University.
                                          The research presented here was also partly funded by the Swedish Research Council (VR) Grant
                                          2015-03835 Constructive and category-theoretic foundations of mathematics.
                                                                                            1
2                   PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


                                      1. Introduction
     Higher inductive types are a recent innovation in dependent type theory. They
were originally motivated by the homotopical interpretations of type theory [AW09,
 KL12, Uni13], as a way to construct types corresponding to homotopy-theoretic cell
 complexes such as spheres, tori, and so on.
     For instance, a circle can be constructed as a topological cell complex with one
 point (0-cell) and one path (1-cell) with both endpoints glued to the point. The
 homotopy-type-theoretic view of paths as corresponding to elements of identity
 types suggests considering a “circle type” S 1 that is “inductively generated” by
 a point base : S 1 and an identity loop : IdS 1 (base, base). Similarly, a torus can
 be constructed as a cell complex with one point, two paths, and one disc (2-cell)
whose boundary traverses the paths in one order on one side and the other order
 on the other side; this suggests a “torus type” T 2 that is inductively generated
 by one point base : T 2 , two identities left, right : IdT 2 (base, base), and an “iterated
 identity” sq : IdIdT 2 (base,base) (left  right, right  left) (where  denotes the concatenation
 of identities).
     Although it may seem odd to consider “inductive constructors” that take values
 not in an inductive type itself but in its identity types, it is not hard to write
 down rules for such types in the usual dependent-type-theory style of formation,
 introduction, elimination, and computation principles. For instance, in the case of
 S 1 , the terms base and loop are the introduction rules, while the elimination rule says
 that to define a section x : S 1 ` f (x) : P (x) of a type family over S 1 it suffices to give
 a point f (base) : P (base) and a lift of the loop apf (loop) : Idloop       P (f (base), f (base))
(see §5 for the meaning of the notation), and the computation rules say that f
 evaluates on base and loop to the given data.
     The above examples are “non-recursive” higher inductive types, analogous to
 binary sum types and the empty type, considered as ordinary inductive types. The
“most general” non-recursive higher inductive type, in the sense that all others can be
 constructed from it, is a (homotopy) pushout: given two functions f1 : A → B1 and
 f2 : A → B2 , their pushout is a type DQinductively generated by maps ν1 : B1 → D
 and ν2 : B2 → D and a homotopy µ : x:A IdD (ν1 (f1 (x)), ν2 (f2 (x))). In particular,
 from pushouts we can construct all other finite homotopy colimits (and also some
 infinite ones, using the natural numbers type).
     We can also consider higher inductive types that do have recursive constructors.
 For instance, in homotopy type theory a proposition is defined toQbe a type any
 two elements of which are equal, i.e. such that there is a term in x,y:A IdA (x, y).
The propositional truncation of an arbitrary type A is a proposition kAk with a
 map from A that is “universal”; it can be regarded as the higher inductive type
 generated
 Q            by one ordinary constructor tr : A → kAk and one higher constructor treq :
    x,y:kAk  IdkAk (x, y). (The latter is “recursive” because the inputs x, y belong to
 the type kAk being constructed.) Other recursive higher inductive types include the
 n-truncation for any n (a universal map into a homotopy n-type — the propositional
 truncation is the case n = −1) and the localization at a family of morphisms {fi }i∈I
(the universal map into a type that “sees each fi as an isomorphism”).
     In particular, the 0-truncation of a pushout of 0-types (types satisfying Uniqueness
 of Identity Proofs, a.k.a. “sets”) is a pushout in the category of 0-types. If we
 also assume Voevodsky’s univalence axiom (or just its restriction to propositions),
                     SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                             3


we can show that the latter category is a pretopos; see [Uni13, Chapter 10]. In
particular, one has exact set-quotients of equivalence relations, eliminating the need
for the cumbersome method of “setoids”. Recursive higher inductive 0-types (also
known as “quotient inductive types” [ACDF16]) have other applications, such as
constructing free algebras for arbitrary algebraic theories (which is not possible in a
general elementary topos [Bla83]) and representing type theory inside itself [AK16].
Thus, higher inductive types add power even for the representation of ordinary
set-based mathematics inside type theory.
   A general discussion of the syntax of higher inductive types (though not going so
far as to propose a general definition) can be found in [Uni13, Chapter 6]. They have
succeeded admirably at their original goal of providing types in homotopy type theory
that behave like cell complexes in classical homotopy theory (see [Uni13, Chapter
8] and also more recent work). Interestingly, although the original motivation came
from inspecting small concrete cell complexes such as circles and tori, the more
complicated recursive higher inductive types (such as n-truncation and localization)
also correspond to constructions in classical homotopy theory (such as Postnikov
towers and Bousfield localization) that are usually performed using cell complexes,
albeit transfinite and often unwieldy ones. This yields a strong intuition that
higher inductive types are somehow a type-theoretic replacement for cell complexes.
However, there is some distance from this intuition to a formal proof that higher
inductive types actually exist in homotopical models of type theory.
   The goal of the present paper is to fill this gap. The basic ideas were known to
the authors several years ago, and circulated informally in the community, but the
results have not been written out precisely until now.
   Roughly speaking, there are the following issues to overcome in constructing
semantics for higher inductive types.

   (i) When interpreting type theory in a model category, types are represented by
       fibrant objects. But cell complexes are built out of colimits, which do not
       preserve fibrancy; thus we need to “fibrantly replace” them.
  (ii) The usual constructions of homotopy theory, including cell complexes and
       fibrant replacement, produce the right answer only up to homotopy equivalence.
       But the induction principle of a higher inductive type is somewhat stricter
       than this (though it falls short of determining it up to strict isomorphism).
 (iii) Everything in type theory is stable under substitution, so in order to be type-
       theoretically meaningful a category-theoretic construction must be stable under
       pullback (at least “weakly stable”, as in [LW15]). But fibrant replacement is
       not in general stable under pullback, even weakly.
 (iv) The constructors of an ordinary inductive type are unrelated to each other.
       But in a higher inductive type each constructor must be able to refer to
       the previous ones; specifically, the source and target of a path-constructor
       generally involve the previous point-constructors. No syntactic scheme has
       yet been proposed for this that covers all cases of interest while remaining
       meaningful and consistent, so the “target” of an interpretation theorem is not
       even precisely defined.

As we will see, problem (ii) only arises in the recursive case; but on the other hand,
it is not specific to higher inductive types, being a problem even for interpreting
ordinary recursive inductive types such as natural numbers and W-types.
4                  PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


   We present (in §12) a general context that solves problems (i)–(iii), and partially
solves (iv) in the following sense. We describe a semantic construction (a “cell
monad”) that enables subsequent “constructors” to refer to previous ones, and
determines a precise semantic meaning for what the source and target of a path-
constructor can be. However, although in particular cases it is easy to see that the
syntactic source and targets in the specification of a higher inductive type give rise
to the desired semantic structure, we do not give a general syntactic characterization
of allowable “source and target terms”.1 Moreover, there are some kinds of source
and target terms that seem natural syntactically but do not fit into our semantic
framework.
   For expositional clarity, instead of jumping right to the general context of cell
monads, we begin (after preliminaries in §2 and a warm-up in §3) in §§4–6 by
considering in detail the case of pushouts. These are subject only to problems (i)
and (iii). We solve (i) by a simple ordinary fibrant replacement, and (iii) by pulling
back separately along fibrations (which are easy) and acyclic cofibrations (using a
pushout-product argument).
   In §7 we consider the natural numbers type, which is of course simpler because it
lacks any path-constructors, but is recursive and thus subject to problems (i)–(iii).
We solve problem (ii) by using an algebraic fibrant replacement, which retains better
control over the point-set-level behavior than an ordinary fibrant replacement, in
particular enabling us to prove the type-theoretic universal property. However,
the simple pushout-product argument for (iii) that applies in the non-recursive
case is no longer applicable in the recursive case. Thus, to prove weak stability
for natural numbers, we alter the usual interpretation of type theory a little by
requiring contexts as well as types to be fibrant (this turns out to be true anyway a
posteriori in the usual interpretation, it’s just not usually assumed explicitly at the
outset). This allows us to ignore the case of pullback along acyclic cofibrations.
   In §8 we consider W-types, which add only one wrinkle to natural numbers: since
they have nontrivial parameters, we have to be able to pull back along acyclic
cofibrations in addition to along fibrations. But requiring contexts to be fibrant
still solves the problem, with some extra work: it ensures that acyclic cofibrations
have retractions, which together with an “extension lemma” enables us to reduce
an elimination problem over the domain to one over the codomain.
   These specific cases, while admittedly rather specific, are by themselves sufficient
for a large fraction of current homotopy type theory and synthetic homotopy theory.
In particular, Kraus [Kra16] and van Doorn [van16] have shown that from pushouts
and the natural numbers one can construct the propositional truncation, while
Rijke [Rij17, Rij16] has shown that one can even construct all n-truncations along
with some localizations, and some have even conjectured that all higher inductive
types might be similarly constructible. To motivate the need for further work,
therefore, in §9 we describe a specific higher inductive type that definitely cannot
be constructed in terms of pushouts and natural numbers.
   As one final warm-up for the general case, in §10 we discuss the propositional
truncation. This is special in many ways, but still exhibits the one remaining basic
new idea in our general approach, namely algebraic pushouts of monads. A sequence

   1In [ACDF16] a similar semantic characterization is internalized literally, using universes, under
the assumption of UIP; but with present technology this does not generalize to type theory without
UIP, since (∞, 1)-categories are not known to be definable internally.
                      SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                              5


of such pushouts along “generating monad cells” yields what we call a cell monad,
since it is a precise analogue of a cell complex, only built in the category of monads.
Each generating monad cell corresponds to one constructor of a higher inductive
type; thus we might say that higher inductive types replace the large unwieldy cell
complexes of classical algebraic topology with small manageable “cell complexes”
constructed at a higher level of abstraction.
    In §11 we describe cell monads for higher inductive types without parameters,
and in §12 we generalize to the parametrized case. Most of the work in these sections
is just in setting up a sufficiently general context in which to prove the theorems.
As mentioned above, we do not have a syntactic context of equal generality; but we
explain heuristically, with many examples, how to perform a syntax-to-semantics
translation in particular cases. We also discuss some limitations of our construction;
most importantly, the fact that source and target terms cannot contain “fibrant
structure” such as eliminations from other inductive and higher inductive types. This
includes concatenation of paths, as used for instance in the standard presentaiton of
the torus; however, for this and many other examples, we show how to work around
the issue by using more general cofibrations. In §13 we summarize our results for
quick reference.
Remark 1.1. Since type-theoretic laws hold up to strict equality, whereas categorical
 constructions are well-behaved only up to isomorphism (or homotopy), the standard
way to interpret dependent type theory into categories involves an intermediate
“strictification” step. For this we will use the local universes coherence method [LW15],
which replaces any well-behaved comprehension category by a split one in such a
way that any “weakly stable” structure possessed by the original becomes “strictly
 stable” structure in the splitting. In §§3 and 8 we use results from [LW15] verbatim,
while elsewhere we have to prove the analogous theorems ourselves; this is generally
 straightforward, although it is worth noting that the “cofibrancy” of a cell monad
 plays a role not only in the weak stability of its homotopy-initial algebras but also
 the “representability” of its structures, both of which are necessary for the local
 universes theorem.
    Once such a strict algebraic structure has been built from a desired categorical
 model, the interpretation is completed by constructing the initial such algebraic
 structure out of the syntax of type theory, so that there is a unique structured map
 interpreting all the syntax into the desired model. Such an initiality theorem was
 suggested by [Car86], and proven thoroughly by [Str91] for a specific non-toy type
 theory, the Calculus of Constructions. Such proofs are too long and bureaucratic
 for anyone to want to write or read in detail, but opinions differ as to whether
 they are straightforward enough that initiality for other type theories (such as
 those considered here) may be considered established. We take no position on
 this question; our only goal is to construct split comprehension categories with the
 appropriate strictly stable structure to model higher inductive types, and so we will
 simply refer to these as “models of type theory”.
   Our perspective on higher inductive types can be summarized as follows. It is
well-known that ordinary inductive types can be described as initial algebras for
polynomial endofunctors (and this remains true in homotopy type theory [AGS15]).
An algebra for an endofunctor F (in the endofunctor sense, i.e. an object X with a
map F X → X) is the same as an algebra (in the monad sense) for the algebraically-
free monad generated by F ; thus ordinary inductive types are equivalently initial
6                PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


algebras for free monads on polynomial endofunctors. Since (unlike an endofunctor)
a monad always has an initial algebra, the existence of inductive types is really
about the existence of such free monads themselves.
   Higher inductive types generalize from free monads to presented monads, i.e. mon-
ads constructed as an algebraic colimit of free monads on polynomial endofunctors.
(A colimit of monads is “algebraic” if an algebra structure for the colimit monad is
determined by compatible algebra structures for the monads in the input diagram.)
Intuitively, a “cell monad” is one with such a presentation that is “homotopically
meaningful”, i.e. a “homotopy colimit of monads”. This suggests a way to say what
it means for a category (or (∞, 1)-category) to “have higher inductive types”: that
algebraic colimits of algebraically-free monads on polynomial endofunctors exist
(with all these words interpreted 1-categorically or (∞, 1)-categorically as appro-
priate). This is known to be true for locally presentable 1-categories, and ought to
be true for locally presentable (∞, 1)-categories as well; but it is not immediately
obvious how to make it precise in an “elementary” way.
   While our general construction achieves a lot, there is also still a lot left to do.
Open problems include the following.
   • Our type theory does not contain any universes. In some respects this is a
     feature rather than a bug, since it makes the semantics more general: our model
     categories include all locally presentable locally cartesian closed 1-categories
     and suffice to present all locally presentable locally cartesian closed (∞, 1)-
     categories. Of course, if a model category does have universes, such as simplicial
     sets [KL12] and others constructed from it [Shu15b, Shu15a, Cis14, Shu17],
     then higher inductive types are more powerful due to “large eliminations”,
     which are used frequently in synthetic homotopy theory.
        However, there is an additional desirable feature that our method does not
     produce even in models that have universes. One hopes to have universes
     that are closed under parametrized higher inductive types, for instance that if
     A, B1 , B2 all lie in some universe then so does some pushout of any f1 : A → B1
     and f2 : A → B2 . But our method does not give this, because it involves
     fibrant replacement, which does not preserve smallness of fibers. (The different
    “cubical” methods of [CHM18] do appear to produce universes closed under
     higher inductive types.)
   • As mentioned above, although our method allows very general “source and
     target terms”, it does not allow “fibrant structure” therein, such as path-
     concatenation and eliminations from inductive types. While we can work
     around this in many cases, it would be better to be able to drop the restriction.
   • Of course, we would like a general syntactic scheme for higher inductive types,
     and a general theorem interpreting such syntax using our general semantics,
     rather than having to treat every case manually.
   • Finally, there are various generalizations of higher inductive types that we
     have not addressed, such as indexed higher inductive families, higher inductive-
     inductive types (e.g. [Uni13, Chapter 11] and [AK16]), and higher inductive-
     recursive types (e.g. [Shu14]). A starting point would be to unify our approach
     with that of [ACDF16].

                           2. Good model categories
    We will work throughout in the following contexts.
                         SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                         7


Definition 2.1. A good model category is a model category M with the fol-
lowing additional properties.
    (i) M is simplicial.
   (ii) Every monomorphism in M is a cofibration.
  (iii) Cofibrations in M are stable under arbitrary limits.
  (iv) M is right proper, i.e. weak equivalences are preserved by pullback along
        fibrations.
   (v) M is locally cartesian closed, as a simplicial category.
An excellent model category2 is a good model category that is in addition
combinatorial, i.e. it satisfies the following further properties.
  (vi) M is cofibrantly generated.
 (vii) As a category, M is locally presentable.
Example 2.2. A Cisinski model category [Cis02, Cis06] is a cofibrantly generated
model structure on a Grothendieck topos whose cofibrations are the monomor-
phisms. Therefore, any right proper, simplicially locally cartesian closed, simplicial
Cisinski model category is an excellent model category. Cisinski [Cis12] and Gepner–
Kock [GK17] have shown that any locally presentable locally cartesian closed
(∞, 1)-category (and in particular any Grothendieck (∞, 1)-topos [Lur09]) can be
presented by such a model category.
Example 2.3. Any complete and cocomplete locally cartesian closed category with
its trivial model structure (the weak equivalences are the isomorphisms and all
morphisms are cofibrations and fibrations) is also a good model category. If it is
locally presentable, then it is an excellent model category. Thus, we also include
the standard examples of semantics for extensional type theory.
Non-example 2.4. The category of groupoids, which was the first homotopical model
of type theory [HS98], satisfies all the axioms of a good model category except that
it is not locally cartesian closed: only fibrations of groupoids are exponentiable. It
is possible that with some care our method could be generalized to such examples,
at the expense of increased awkwardness (for instance, Lemma 11.9 would no longer
be true exactly as stated).
Remark 2.5. The first version of this paper omitted the condition that good model
categories should be simplicially locally cartesian closed, required for copowers to
be stable under pullback; see [Shu19] and followups.
   Assumption (i) tells us that M is simplicially enriched, with powers and copowers3
satisfying the pushout-product and pullback-corner axioms, and (by assumption (v))
preserved by pullbacks. This enables us to construct path objects (which model
identity types) as simplicial powers. Specifically, if ∆1 denotes the 1-simplex (the
                                                                  1
simplicial interval), then for any fibrant object A, the power A∆ is a path-object for
                                                                      1
                                                                            ∆1
A. Likewise, if p : A  Γ is a fibration, then the “fibred power” A∆Γ =A       ×Γ∆1 Γ
is a path-object for A regarded as a type over Γ; see Theorem 5.2.
   This is important for us because it means that homotopies can be represented
                                      1
in adjoint form: a map A → B ∆ is equivalent to a map A ⊗ ∆1 → B, where
   2Note that this nonce definition is different from the similarly-named [Lur09, Definition A.3.2.16],
though it shares some of the same conditions.
   3Also known as cotensors and tensors, respectively.
8                PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


 A ⊗ ∆1 is the simplicial copower. Note that like other colimits, the simplicial
 copower of p : A  Γ in the slice category over Γ is just A ⊗ ∆1 with the projection
 A ⊗ ∆1 → A → Γ. Moreover, each slice category of M is a simplicial model category,
 and pullback preserves both simplicial powers and copowers. Given A ∈ M /Γ, we
write AK Γ for the simplicial power in M /Γ.
     Every good model category is a type-theoretic model category in the sense
 of [Shu15b], and hence the subcategory of fibrant objects is a type-theoretic fibration
 category. In particular, cofibrations are stable under pullback, so acyclic cofibrations
 are stable under pullback along fibrations, and hence dependent products of fibrations
 along fibrations are fibrations. Taken together, this implies that the fibrations in
 a good model category M form a comprehension category (M , F) that has the
 categorical structure corresponding to type theory with dependent sums (including
 a unit type), dependent products, and identity types.
     To actually construct such an interpretation requires a coherence theorem making
 all the structure strictly stable under pullback. We will use the coherence method
 of [LW15], which applies to many different kinds of structure. The input to this
 method is a general comprehension category (C, T ). One then defines the left
 adjoint splitting (C, T! ) (or just C! for short) in which a type A ∈ T! (Γ) consists
 of an object VA ∈ C, a type EA ∈ T (VA ), and a map pAq : Γ → VA . We call VA the
“local universe” and think of this as a representative of the pullback of EA along pAq.
 Reindexing of such types is done by simple composition (A[f ] is pAq ◦ f ) which is
 strictly associative. The local universes technique then shows that if C satisfies a
 technical condition (see (LF) below) and C has “weakly stable” structure of some
 sort, meaning that it exists in each fiber T (Γ) and the reindexing of a structure is a
 structure, then C! admits strictly stable structure (obtained by constructing weakly
 stable structure once in the “universal case”), and thus provides semantics for the
 corresponding type-theoretic rules. See [LW15] for details.
     We summarize the above discussion as follows.

Theorem 2.6. Any good model category M admits a natural structure of a
comprehension category (M , F) where F(Γ) is the category of fibrations with
codomain Γ. Moreover, (M , F) has weakly stable dependent sums, unit type,
dependent products, and identity types, and therefore (M , F! ) has strictly stable
dependent sums, unit type, dependent products, and identity types.
   Similarly, writing (Mf , Ff ) for the restriction of (M , F) to fibrant objects,
(Mf , Ff ) carries the same weakly stable structure, and hence (Mf , Ff ,! ) the same
strictly stable structure.


                                   3. Coproducts
   We warm up for pushouts by considering the case of coproducts. To start with,
we specialize the definitions from [LW15, §3.4.1] to our context of a good model
category. We qualify these definitions with “typal” (the adjective of “type”) to
distinguish them from the ordinary categorical constructions in M .

Definition 3.1. A typal coproduct of fibrations A1 → Γ and A2 → Γ consists
of a fibration A1 ⊕ A2 → Γ with maps νi : Ai → A1 ⊕ A2 over Γ such that for any
fibration C → A1 ⊕ A2 with sections ti : Ai → C over νi , there exists a section
s : A1 ⊕ A2 → C such that s ◦ νi = ti .
                     SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                             9


    We say M has weakly stable typal coproducts if for any A1 → Γ and A2 → Γ
there exists a typal coproduct A1 ⊕ A2 such that for any σ : ∆ → Γ, the pullback
σ ∗ (A1 ⊕ A2 ) with injections σ ∗ νi is a typal coproduct of σ ∗ A1 and σ ∗ A2 .
Theorem 3.2 ([LW15, Lemma 3.4.1.4]). If M has weakly stable typal coproducts,
then its left adjoint splitting models type theory with coproduct types.
   Now, how do we actually construct weakly stable typal coproducts? Of course,
since M is a model category, it has ordinary categorical coproducts, and the
coproduct A1 + A2 → Γ satisfies all parts of Definition 3.1 except that it may not
be a fibration. (Admittedly, for some particularly nice M , such as simplicial sets, it
is always a fibration. However, we treat the general case not only out of a desire
for generality, but because in the case of pushouts the analogous argument will be
necessary even when M is simplicial sets.)
   The obvious solution is to fibrantly replace it. Thus, let A1 + A2 → A1 ⊕ A2  Γ
be an (acyclic cofibration, fibration) factorization.
Theorem 3.3. For any fibrations A1  Γ and A2  Γ, the fibration A1 ⊕ A2  Γ
is a weakly stable typal coproduct.
Proof. We define the injections by composition with those of A1 + A2 . To show
that A1 ⊕ A2 is a typal coproduct, let C  A1 ⊕ A2 be a fibration with sections ti
over Ai . Then the universal property of A1 + A2 induces a section t : A1 + A2 → C,
and the lifting property of the acyclic cofibration A1 + A2 → A1 ⊕ A2 against the
fibration C  A1 ⊕ A2 allows us to extend this section to A1 ⊕ A2 .
    To show that this typal coproduct is weakly stable, it suffices to show that for
any σ : ∆ → Γ, the pullback σ ∗ (A1 + A2 ) → σ ∗ (A1 ⊕ A2 ) is again an acyclic
cofibration. Since cofibrations are stable under pullback, this map is a cofibration;
thus it remains to show it is a weak equivalence. Weak equivalences are not generally
stable under pullback, but weak equivalences between fibrations are; so we would
be done if A1 + A2 → Γ were a fibration, but the whole point is that it may not be.
    Right properness of M ensures that weak equivalences are also stable under
pullback along fibrations, so we would be done if σ were a fibration. In general
it may not be either, but we can factor it as an acyclic cofibration followed by a
fibration. Thus, without loss of generality we may assume that σ is an acyclic
cofibration.
    In this case, right properness tells us that the induced maps σ ∗ Ai → Ai and
  ∗
σ (A1 ⊕ A2 ) → (A1 ⊕ A2 ) are weak equivalences, hence acyclic cofibrations, since
they are pullbacks of σ along fibrations. Moreover, acyclic cofibrations are closed
under coproducts (being the left class of a weak factorization system), so the induced
map σ ∗ A1 + σ ∗ A2 → A1 + A2 is an acyclic cofibration. Moreover, since σ ∗ is a left
adjoint, it preserves coproducts. Thus, in the following square
                                             ∼
                            σ ∗ (A1 + A2 )       A1 + A2
                                                      ∼
                                             ∼
                            σ ∗ (A1 ⊕ A2 )       A1 ⊕ A2
all the marked maps are acyclic cofibrations, hence weak equivalences. Hence, by
2-out-of-3, so is the remaining map, which is what we wanted.                 
Corollary 3.4. The left adjoint splitting of M models coproduct types.              
10               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


                        4. Pushouts in model categories
   Higher inductive pushouts are not a traditionally standard type constructor, so
we need to begin with definitions. First we consider a sort of weakly stable structure
that only makes sense in a context where we have simplicial homotopies. In §5 we
will rephrase this in type-theoretic language and prove the relevant local universes
coherence theorem.


Definition 4.1. Let f1 : A → B1 and f2 : A → B2 be morphisms between
fibrations A  Γ and Bi  Γ. A ∆1 -typal pushout is a fibration D  Γ with
maps νi : Bi → D over Γ and a homotopy µ : A ⊗ ∆1 → D over Γ between ν1 ◦ f1
and ν2 ◦ f2 , such that for any fibration C  D equipped with sections ti : Bi → C
over νi and a homotopy u : A ⊗ ∆1 → C over µ, there exists a section s : D → C
such that s ◦ νi = ti and s ◦ µ = u.
    We say M has weakly stable ∆1 -typal pushouts if for any f1 , f2 there exists
a ∆1 -typal pushout D such that for any σ : ∆ → Γ, the pullback σ ∗ D with injections
σ ∗ νi and homotopy σ ∗ µ is a ∆1 -typal pushout of σ ∗ f1 and σ ∗ f2 .


Theorem 4.2. Any good model category has weakly stable ∆1 -typal pushouts.


Proof. Give f1 , f2 , let Q be their explicit homotopy pushout, meaning the pushout
of the following diagram in M :



                                            ι
                                 A+A             A ⊗ ∆1
                               f1 +f2

                                B1 + B2



By construction, this satisfies all parts of Definition 4.1 except that it may not be a
fibration over Γ. (And in this case it really isn’t, even in simplicial sets.) Let D
be its fibrant replacement, i.e. we have a factorization Q → D  Γ as an acyclic
cofibration followed by a fibration. Then D has injections and a homotopy obtained
by composition from Q, and for any fibration C  D as in Definition 4.1 we can
first define a section over Q by its universal property and then extend to D by lifting
against the acyclic cofibration Q → D.
    It remains to deal with weak stability. As in Theorem 3.3, for this it suffices to
show that σ ∗ Q → σ ∗ D is an acyclic cofibration for any acyclic cofibration σ : ∆ → Γ,
and by 2-out-of-3 it suffices to show that σ ∗ Q → Q is an acyclic cofibration. Again,
σ ∗ preserves colimits and simplicial copowers, so σ ∗ Q is the pushout of σ ∗ B1 + σ ∗ B2
and σ ∗ A ⊗ ∆1 under σ ∗ A + σ ∗ A. Furthermore, again as in Theorem 3.3, σ ∗ A → A
and σ ∗ Bi → Bi are acyclic cofibrations, hence so are σ ∗ A + σ ∗ A → A + A and
σ ∗ B1 + σ ∗ B2 → B1 + B2 .
                          SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                      11


  Now consider the following commutative cube, in which the left-hand and right-
hand faces are pushouts, and the objects R and S are also pushouts.
                                                            ∼
                                   σ∗ A + σ∗ A                         A+A
                                                  R
            ∗         1
          σ A⊗∆                ∼                          A ⊗ ∆1

                                                                   ∼
                                σ ∗ B1 + σ ∗ B2                        B1 + B2
                                                      S
                ∗
                σ Q                                         Q


To show that σ ∗ Q → Q is an acyclic cofibration, it will suffice to show that both of
its factors σ ∗ Q → S and S → Q are such. The former is easy, since it is a pushout
of the acyclic cofibration σ ∗ B1 + σ ∗ B2 → B1 + B2 . For the latter, a standard
argument shows that it is the pushout of the map R → A ⊗ ∆1 in the upper square.
However, this map is the pushout-product of the acyclic cofibration σ ∗ A → A
and the cofibration of simplicial sets 2 → ∆1 . Thus since the model structure is
simplicial, it is an acyclic cofibration as well.                                   

                    5. Pushouts in comprehension categories
   Inside of (ordinary, Martin-Löf) type theory, of course, we do not have a “∆1 ”,
so Definition 4.1 does not correspond directly to anything type-theoretic the way
Definition 3.1 does. Instead we need a version of this definition that refers only to
identity types, which categorically means path-objects. This is an instance of “one
type constructor stacked on top of another”, like the case of W-types considered
in [LW15, §3.4.4]; hence we need to start by defining good classes of identity types.
   Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category. As in [LW15], if A ∈ T (Γ) we denote
its comprehension by Γ.A → Γ, and its reindexing along σ : ∆ → Γ by A[σ].
   In what follows, by a family we mean an indexed family. That is, a “family
of elements of S”, for any set S, consists of a set F and a function F → S. We
often abuse notation by identifying elements of F with their images in S, but it is
important that such a family is not just a subset of S. There is a category Fam
whose objects are families F → S and whose morphisms are commutative squares.
Definition 5.1. A stable class of identity types on C consists of:
 • For each A ∈ T (Γ), a non-empty family GId (A) of elements of T (Γ.A.A), called
   “good identity types” IdA . These must be weakly stable under reindexing, in
    that for any σ : ∆ → Γ, there is a morphism of families GId (A) → GId (A[σ])
    over the reindexing functor T (Γ.A.A) → T (∆.A[σ].A[σ]). If IdA ∈ GId (A) is a
    good identity type for A, we abuse notation by writing IdA [σ] ∈ GId (A[σ]) for
    its image.
 • For each good identity type IdA ∈ GId (A), a non-empty family Gr (A, IdA ) of
   “good reflexivity terms” that are sections of IdA [δA ] ∈ T (Γ.A). These must
    be weakly stable under reindexing, in that we have morphisms of families
    Gr (A, IdA ) → Gr (A[σ], IdA [σ]) over the reindexing morphisms of types and good
    identity types.
12                   PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


     • For each good identity type IdA and good reflexivity term r, and each type
       C ∈ T (Γ.A.A.IdA ) equipped with a section c of C[δA , r] ∈ T (Γ.A), a non-empty
       family GJ (IdA , r, C, c) of “good extensions” of c to a section of C itself. Of course,
       every good extension must actually be an extension, i.e. its composite with
       δA ◦ r must be c. Good extensions must also be weakly stable under reindexing,
       in that we have morphisms GJ (IdA , r, C, c) → GJ (IdA [σ], r[σ], C[σ], c[σ]) over the
       reindexings of everything else.
  Note that the underlying data of a good identity type and a good reflexivity term
consist equivalently of a factorization of Γ.A → Γ.A.A through the comprehension
Γ.A.A.IdA → Γ.A.A of some type IdA .
Theorem 5.2. If M is a good model category, then (M , F) has a stable class of
identity types, called the canonical stable class of identity types, in which:
  • GId (A) is the set of objects of M /Γ equipped with data exhibiting the universal
                                               1
     property of the simplicial power (Γ.A)∆ Γ therein.
  • For each such object, the factorization Γ.A → (Γ.A)∆
                                                           1
                                                                      ∼
                                                          Γ → Γ.A.A = Γ.A ×Γ Γ.A
                                                       1
     is induced by powering with the maps 2 → ∆ → 1 of simplicial sets. In
     particular, every good identity type has exactly one good reflexivity term.
  • For any C and c, every extension of c to IdA is good in a unique way (i.e. the
     family of good extensions is simply the set of all extensions).
                                       1
Proof. The projection (Γ.A)∆    Γ → Γ.A ×Γ Γ.A is the pullback corner map for the
fibrant object Γ.A ∈ M /Γ and the cofibration 2 → ∆1 . Since M /Γ is a simplicial
model category, this map is a fibration, hence the comprehension of a type over
Γ.A.A.
    The stability of simplicial powers under pullback gives the reindexing operations
for good identity types and good reflexivity terms. Note that unlike for many
other type constructors such as Σ- and Π-types, although these identity types are
determined by a 1-categorical universal property, the type-theoretic data we consider
(the reflexivity term) is not sufficient to describe this universal property.
                                             1
    Similarly, the inclusion Γ.A → (Γ.A)∆   Γ is the pullback corner map for A and
the projection ∆1 → 1. Since Γ.A is fibrant in M /Γ and ∆1 → 1 is a weak
equivalence between cofibrant objects, this is a weak equivalence. Moreover, it
is a split monomorphism, hence a cofibration, and thus an acyclic cofibration. It
follows that given any C and c there exists such an extension, i.e. the family of good
extensions defined in the theorem statement is non-empty. Of course the reindexing
of any extension is again an extension, and pseudofunctoriality is automatic.        
   By the adjointness between simplicial powers and copowers, a simplicial homotopy
A ⊗ ∆1 → B between f, g : A ⇒ B is equivalently a lift of (f, g) : A → B × B to
                                        1
any canonical identity type IdB = B ∆ , i.e. a term of IdB [(f, g)] in context A. But
in order to rephrase Definition 4.1 relative to a stable class of identity types, we
also need to talk about “homotopies over homotopies”, for which we need dependent
identity types. Inside of type theory, the dependent identity type looks like this, for
a dependent type x : A ` B(x) type:
         a1 : A, a2 : A, e : IdA (a1 , a2 ), b1 : A(a1 ), b2 : A(a2 ) ` Idex.B(x) (b1 , b2 ) type
That is, it tells us how to identify two points in different fibers along a path in the
base. Inside type theory, there are many ways to define such a type:
                       SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                 13


   (i) If we first define the transport operation e∗ : B(x) → B(y) (using the elimina-
       tor for identity types), then we can define Idex.B(x) (u, v) to be IdB(y) (e∗ (u), v).
       This is the definition used by [Uni13] and [HoT15, BGL+ 17].
  (ii) We could instead use IdB(x) (u, (e−1 )∗ (v)), where e−1 : IdA (y, x) is the inverse
                            −1
       path of e (i.e. ( – ) witnesses the symmetry of equality).
 (iii) We could use the eliminator for identity types on e, with Idrefl   x
                                                                       x.B(x) (u, v) defined
       to be IdB(x) (u, v). This is the definition used by [HoT13].
 (iv) We could define Idex.B(x) (u, v) as an inductive family, with a single constructor
       giving for any x : A and u : B(x) an element reflu : Idrefl  x
                                                                  x.B(x) (u, u).

Compared to the first three, option (iv) has the disadvantage that Idrefl   x
                                                                          x.B(x) (u, v) is
not judgmentally equal to IdB(x) (u, v). However, option (iv) is also the one that
corresponds most directly to the native path-object structure in a good model
category, so it is the one we will adopt. In §6 we will show that our construction
also gives pushouts relative to choices (i)–(iii), albeit in a slightly weaker sense.

Definition 5.3. Suppose C has a stable class of identity types. A stable class of
dependent identity types relative to this stable class consists of the following
data, each of which must be weakly stable in a straightforward sense.
  • For each A ∈ T (Γ) and B ∈ T (Γ.A), and each good identity type IdA ∈ GId (A),
    a non-empty family GbId (A, IdA , B) of “good dependent identity types” IdA        B in
    T (Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B).
  • For each good dependent identity type as above, and each good reflexivity
    term rA for IdA , a non-empty family Gbr (A, IdA , r, B, IdA B ) of “good dependent
                                                 A
    reflexivity terms” that are sections of IdB [δA , rA , δB ] ∈ T (Γ.A.B).
  • For each good dependent identity type and good dependent reflexivity term
    as above, and each type C ∈ T (Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.IdA       B ) equipped with a section
                           A
    c of C[δA , rA , δB , rB ] ∈ T (Γ.A.B), a nonempty family GbJ (A, IdA , rA , B, IdA    A
                                                                                      B , rB )
    of “good extensions” of c to a section of C itself (which are actually extensions
    thereof).

   Similarly to the non-dependent case, the underlying data of a good dependent
identity type and a good dependent reflexivity term consist of a factorization of the
diagonal of Γ.A.B that lies over a given factorization of the diagonal of Γ.A, such
that the dashed pullback map shown below is a dependent projection:

    Γ.A.B                 Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.IdA
                                           B                               Γ.A.A.B.B
                                            Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B


      Γ.A                      Γ.A.A.IdA                                      Γ.A.A

Theorem 5.4. If M is a good model category, then (M , F) has a canonical
stable class of dependent identity types over the canonical stable class of
identity types, in which:
  • GbId (A, IdA , B) is the set of objects of M /Γ equipped with the universal property
                                         1
    of a simplicial power (Γ.A.B)∆     Γ .
14                 PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


     • For each such object, the above factorization is given by the following diagram:
                                                      1
                    Γ.A.B               (Γ.A.B)∆
                                               Γ                    Γ.A.A.B.B
                                                          •

                                                  1
                        Γ.A              (Γ.A)∆
                                              Γ                        Γ.A.A
       In particular, every good dependent identity type has a unique good dependent
       reflexivity term.
     • for any C and c, every extension of c to IdA
                                                  B is good.

Proof. Similarly to the non-dependent case, the dotted projection above is the
pullback corner map for the fibration Γ.A.B → Γ.A and the cofibration 2 → ∆1
in the simplicial model category M /Γ, hence a fibration. The inclusion Γ.A.B →
          1
(Γ.A.B)∆Γ is an acyclic cofibration for the same reasons as in Theorem 5.2, so the
set of good extensions is non-empty.                                            
  Finally, in Definition 4.1 we also need to postcompose a homotopy with a
dependent function. That is, given x : A ` f (x) : B(x), we need the following term:
              a1 : A, a2 : A, e : IdA (a1 , a2 ) ` apf (e) : Idex.B(x) (f (a1 ), f (a2 ))
Inside type theory there is a standard way to define ap, defined using the eliminator
for the identity type. However, once again, in a good model category there is a
different way to define it using the functoriality of simplicial powers (see Theorem 5.6).
Thus, we also introduce this abstractly.
Definition 5.5. Suppose C has stable classes of identity types and dependent
identity types. A stable class of identity applications consists of, for each
types A ∈ T (Γ) and B ∈ T (Γ.A), each section f of B, each good identity type
and reflexivity term for A, and each corresponding dependent identity type and
dependent reflexivity term for B, a non-empty family of “good identity applications”,
which are sections apf of the projection Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.IdA
                                                          B → Γ.A.A.IdA such that
the following squares commute:
                               r
                  Γ.A.B                Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.IdA
                                                        B            Γ.A.A.B.B
                    f                       apf                              (f,f )

                                   r
                    Γ.A                    Γ.A.A.IdA                     Γ.A.A
Moreover, good identity applications must be weakly stable under reindexing in an
evident sense.
Theorem 5.6. If M is a good model category, then (M , F) has a canonical
stable class of identity applications over the canonical stable classes of identity
types and dependent identity types, in which the good sections apf are the maps
   1
fΓ∆ induced by the functoriality of simplicial powers.
Proof. The requisite squares commute by the two-variable functoriality of simplicial
powers.                                                                           
   Note that in order for these maps to be well-defined, we must require an object
of GId (A) to be equipped with the structure of a simplicial power, and hence GId (A)
                      SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                               15


cannot be merely a subset of T (Γ.A.A), since this structure is not determined even
by the reflexivity term.
  Finally, we can define a type-theoretic notion of pushout.
Definition 5.7. Suppose C has stable classes of identity types, dependent identity
types, and identity applications. A stable class of typal pushouts relative to
these stable classes consists of the following data, all weakly stable under reindexing.
  • For each pair f1 : Γ.A → Γ.B1 and f2 : Γ.A → Γ.B2 of morphisms over Γ, a
     non-empty family of “good pushout types” D ∈ T (Γ) equipped with “good
     injections” νi : Γ.Bi → Γ.D over Γ.
  • For any good pushout D and good injections νi , and any good identity type
     for D, a non-empty family of “good glueing data” maps µ : Γ.A → Γ.D.D.IdD
     over (ν1 f1 , ν2 f2 ).
  • For any good identity type, good reflexivity term, and good gluing data and
     good injections for a good pushout D, and any type C ∈ T (D) equipped with
     sections ti over νi , a good dependent identity type IdD  C with good reflexivity
     term, and a morphism u : A → Γ.D.D.IdD .C.C.IdD       C over  (µ, t1 , t2 ), we have a
     non-empty family of good sections s of C such that s ◦ νi = ti , and for any
     good identity application aps we have aps ◦ µ = u.
Theorem 5.8. In any good model category, the ∆1 -typal pushouts (Definition 4.1)
are a stable class of typal pushouts relative to the canonical stable classes of identity
types, dependent identity types, and identity applications.
Proof. The canonical stable classes were constructed exactly so that the data of
Definition 5.7 reduces to that of Definition 4.1.                             

                           6. Pushouts in type theory
   Finally, we move to strict stability and type theory. Recall the basic condition
on a comprehension category (C, T ) that makes local universe theorems work:
            C has finite products, and dependent exponentials of display maps
(LF)
            and product projections along display maps.
(A display map is a finite composite of the dependent projections Γ.A → Γ
associated to the comprehensions of types.)
   Of course, since a good model category M is locally cartesian closed, (M , F)
always satisfies condition (LF).
Definition 6.1. A split comprehension category C has:
 • strictly stable identity types if it has a stable class of identity types (Defi-
    nition 5.1) for which each family of good structures is a singleton.
 • strictly stable dependent identity types if in addition it has a stable
    class of dependent identity types for which each family of good structures is a
    singleton.
 • strictly stable identity applications if in addition it has a stable class of
    identity applications for which each family of good structures is a singleton.
 • strictly stable typal pushouts if in addition it has a stable class of typal
    pushouts for which each family of good structures is a singleton.
  Our strictly stable identity types are easily seen to be equivalent to [LW15,
Definition 3.4.3.1] with the “Frobenius” condition omitted (which we don’t bother
16                   PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


                                           Γ ` A type
             Γ, a1 : A, a2 : A ` IdA (a1 , a2 ) type  Γ, a : A ` refla : IdA (a, a)

                                             Γ ` A type
          Γ, x : A, y : A, e : IdA (x, y) ` C type       Γ, x : A ` c : C[x/y, reflx /e]
      Γ, a1 : A, a2 : A, p : IdA (a1 , a2 ) ` J(xye.C, x.c, a1 , a2 , p) : C[a1 /x, a2 /y, p/e]
                         Γ, a : A ` J(xye.C, x.c, a, a, refla ) ≡ c[a/x]

                                     Figure 1. Identity types


                                Γ ` A type          Γ, x : A ` B type
       Γ, a1 : A, a2 : A, e : IdA (a1 , a2 ), b1 : B[a1 /x], b2 : B[a2 /x] ` IdeB (b1 , b2 ) type
                            Γ, a : A, b : B[a/x] ` refl0b : Idrefl a
                                                                 B (b, b)


                                Γ ` A type          Γ, x : A ` B type
            Γ, x : A, y : A, e : IdA (x, y), u : B, v : B[y/x], d : IdeB (u, v) ` C type
                       Γ, x : A, u : B ` c : C[x/y, reflx /e, u/v, refl0u /d]
     Γ, a1 : A, a2 : A, p : IdA (a1 , a2 ), b1 : B[a1 /x], b2 : B[a2 /x], q : IdpB (b1 , b2 )
         ` J0 (xyeuvd.C, xu.c, a1 , a2 , p, b1 , b2 , q) : C[a1 /x, a2 /y, p/e, b1 /u, b2 /v, q/d]
      Γ, a : A, b : B[a/x] ` J0 (xyeuvd.C, xu.c, a, a, refla , b, b, refl0b ) ≡ c[a/x, b/u]

                             Figure 2. Dependent identity types


                    Γ ` A type        Γ, x : A ` B type           Γ, x : A ` f : B
         Γ, a1 : A, a2 : A, p : IdA (a1 , a2 ) ` apx.f (a1 , a2 , p) : IdpB (f [a1 /x], f [a2 /x])
                            Γ, a : A ` apx.f (a, a, refla ) ≡ refl0f [a/x]

                                Figure 3. Identity applications


with since our intended models all have Π-types). Syntactically, the above strictly
stable structure corresponds to the type-theoretic rules shown in figs. 1 to 4.
Remark 6.2. Because we are not concerned with syntactic properties such as admis-
sibility of substitution, we have no qualms about adding variables to the context of
the conclusion. As a result, multiple rules often have the same premises; we combine
these by listing multiple conclusions in the same rule. This has the additional
advantage that each multiple-conclusion rule corresponds to one new local universe
on the semantic side. (On the other hand, unlike in some syntactic presentations,
we do include all type judgment premises in all rules, since these are necessary
semantically.)
   We now briefly sketch the local universe coherence theorems for all of these
structures; they are all straightforward applications of the techniques of [LW15].
Theorem 6.3. If C has a stable class of identity types and satisfies (LF), then C!
has strictly stable identity types.
                         SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                      17


                      Γ ` A type         Γ ` B1 type          Γ ` B2 type
                          Γ, x : A ` f1 : B1       Γ, x : A ` f2 : B2
                                  Γ ` Push(x.f1 , x.f2 ) type
    Γ, y1 : B1 ` ν1 (y1 ) : Push(x.f1 , x.f2 )     Γ, y2 : B2 ` ν2 (y2 ) : Push(x.f1 , x.f2 )
               Γ, a : A ` µ(a) : IdPush(x.f1 ,x.f2 ) (ν1 (f1 [a/x]), ν2 (f2 [a/x]))

                        Γ ` A type       Γ ` B1 type            Γ ` B2 type
                          Γ, x : A ` f1 : B1         Γ, x : A ` f2 : B2
            Γ, u : Push(x.f1 , x.f2 ) ` C type          Γ, y1 : B1 ` t1 : C[ν1 (y1 )/u]
                                                               µ(x)
   Γ, y2 : B2 ` t2 : C[ν2 (y2 )/u]      Γ, x : A ` m : IdC (t1 [f1 (a)/y1 ], t2 [f2 (a)/y2 ])
              Γ, p : Push(x.f1 , x.f2 ) ` pe(u.C, y1 .t1 , y2 .t2 , a.m, p) : C[p/u]
                 Γ, b1 : B1 ` pe(u.C, y1 .t1 , y2 .t2 , a.m, ν1 (b1 )) ≡ t1 [b1 /y1 ]
                 Γ, b2 : B2 ` pe(u.C, y1 .t1 , y2 .t2 , a.m, ν2 (b2 )) ≡ t2 [b2 /y2 ]
                     Γ, a : A ` apu.pe(u.C,y1 .t1 ,y2 .t2 ,a.m,u) (a) ≡ m[a/x]

                                     Figure 4. Pushouts

Proof. Just like [LW15, Theorem 3.4.3.2], only simpler due to the absence of Frobe-
nius. If A ∈ T! (Γ) are represented by EA ∈ T (VA ), then IdA ∈ T! (Γ.A.A) is
represented by a chosen good identity type IdEA ∈ T (VA .EA .EA ), with reflexivity
term also chosen in the same universal case. The local universe for the elimination
and computation rules is just as in [LW15, Theorem 3.4.3.2] without the types “Bi ”:
                      V = [a : VA ,
                               Y
                           c:     x, x0 : EA (a), y : IdEA (a, x, x0 ).VC ,
                               Y
                           d:      x : EA (a).EC (c(x, x, rEA (a, x)))].
(As in [LW15], we express local universes as iterated Σ-types in the internal exten-
sional type theory of C.)                                                         

Theorem 6.4. If C has a stable class of dependent identity types and satisfies (LF),
then C! has strictly stable dependent identity types.
Proof. If A ∈ T! (Γ) and B ∈ T! (Γ.A) is represented by EA ∈ T (VA ) and EB ∈ T (VB ),
then IdA
       B ∈ T! (Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B) is represented by a chosen good dependent identity
type for EB over EA , with the local universe
                                     [a : VA , b : (VB )EA (a) ]
with dependent reflexivity term likewise chosen in this case. (Note that this local
universe is the same one VA / VB used in [LW15] for Π-types and Σ-types.) The
local universe for the elimination and computation rules is
[a : VA ,
     Y
 b:     x : EA (a).VB ,
     Y
 c:     x, x0 : EA (a), y : IdEA (a, x, x0 ), u : EB (b(x)), u0 : EB (b(x0 )), z : IdE          0            0
                                                                                     EB (a, x, x , y, b, u, u ).VC ,
                                                                                      A

     Y
                                                                   EA
 d:      x : EA (a), u : EB (b(x)).EC (c(x, x, rEA (a, x), u, u, rE  B
                                                                       (a, x, u)))].                 
18                   PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


   It is perhaps worth emphasizing how the above local universes are obtained
essentially algorithmically from the rules in fig. 2, once given that the latter are
written in the style of Remark 6.2. Namely, each premise of a rule corresponds to
one term in the iterated Σ-type, which is a Π-type of the consequent of that premise
over the additional variables (beyond the arbitrary context Γ) in the context of that
premise.
Theorem 6.5. If C has a stable class of identity applications and satisfies (LF),
then C! has strictly stable identity applications.
Proof. The local universe is
                                    [a : VA
                                         Y
                                     b:     x : EA (a).VB ,
                                         Y
                                     f:     x : EA (a).EB (b(x))].                                          

Theorem 6.6. If C has a stable class of typal pushouts and satisfies (LF), then C!
has strictly stable typal pushouts.
Proof. The local universe for the formation and introduction rules is
                                     [a : VA , b1 : VB1 , b2 : VB2 ,
                                           Y
                                      f1 :     x : EA (a).EB1 (b1 ),
                                           Y
                                      f2 :     x : EA (a).EB2 (b2 )].
And the local universe for the elimination and computation rules is
[a : VA , b1 : VB1 , b2 : VB2 ,
      Y
 f1 :     x : EA (a).EB1 (b1 ),
      Y
 f2 :     x : EA (a).EB2 (b2 ),
     Y
 c:     u : EPush(f1 ,f2 ) (a, b1 , b2 , f1 , f2 ).VC ,
      Y
 t1 :     y1 : EB1 (b1 ).EC (c(ν1 (y1 ))),
      Y
 t2 :     y2 : EB2 (b2 ).EC (c(ν2 (y2 ))),
                         Push(f1 ,f2 )
      Y
 m:       x : EA (a).IdC               (a, b1 , b2 , f1 , f2 , c, ν1 (f1 (x)), ν2 (f2 (x)), µ(x), t1 (f1 (x)), t2 (f2 (x)))].
                                                                                                            
Theorem 6.7. For any good model category M , the split comprehension category
(M , F! ) has strictly stable typal pushouts, relative to the strictly stable identity
types, dependent identity types, and identity applications obtained by strictifying
its canonical weakly stable ones.
Proof. Combine Theorems 5.8 and 6.6.                                                                        
   This is almost, but not quite, the result we want. The pushout rules in fig. 4 differ
from those commonly used (e.g. in [Uni13]) by the presence of the additional rules
in figs. 2 and 3. The usual approach is instead to start with only identity types as
in fig. 1, and then define dependent identity types using one of the methods (i)–(iii)
                         SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                          19


                      Γ ` A type          Γ ` B1 type        Γ ` B2 type
                        Γ, x : A ` f1 : B1          Γ, x : A ` f2 : B2
           Γ, u : Push(x.f1 , x.f2 ) ` C type         Γ, y1 : B1 ` t1 : C[ν1 (y1 )/u]
                                                            µ(x)
  Γ, y2 : B2 ` t2 : C[ν2 (y2 )/u]         Γ, x : A ` m : IdC (t1 [f1 (a)/y1 ], t2 [f2 (a)/y2 ])
  Γ, a : A ` pec(u.C, y1 .t1 , y2 .t2 , a.m, a) : Id(apu.pe(u.C,y1 .t1 ,y2 .t2 ,a.m,u) (a), m[a/x])

                       Figure 5. Computation for weak pushouts

listed on page 12, similarly define ap using the eliminator of identity types, and
then state rules such as those in 4 relative to these defined structures.
    Such definitions certainly give some classes of dependent identity types and
identity applications, which are strictly stable if the identity types we started with
are strictly stable. However, if such constructions are performed in (M , F! ), the
resulting strictly stable classes will not generally be the same as those obtained
from the canonical weakly stable ones by the local universes construction. They
will indeed be equivalent, and we can transfer the structure of a pushout across
such an equivalence, but at the cost of weakening the computation rule for the
path-constructor from a judgmental equality to the existence of a path, as follows.
Definition 6.8. A stable class of weak typal pushouts in a comprehension
category (C, T ), relative to given stable classes of identity types, dependent iden-
tity types, and identity applications, consists of all the data and properties in
Definition 5.7 except that instead of aps ◦ µ = m, we have for any good iden-
tity type IdIdD
              C
                ∈ T (Γ.D.D.IdD .C.C.IdD       D
                                         C .IdC ) a non-empty family of “good” maps
v : A → IdIdD
            C
               over (aps ◦ µ, m). If C is split and each family of good structures is a
singleton, we say that C has strictly stable weak typal pushouts.
   Of course, typal pushouts are also weak typal pushouts, since if aps ◦ µ = m we
can compose this map with r to get v. The corresponding modified elimination
rule in syntactic type theory is shown in fig. 5. In the case when the dependent
identity types and identity applications are defined from the ordinary identity types
as on page 12, this yields exactly the notion of pushout type used in [Uni13, §6.8].
Some reasons for choosing a weak computation rule for the path-constructor are
adumbrated in [Uni13, §6.2 and Chapter 6 Notes], one of which (non-strictness of
the equivalence between left and right homotopies) is roughly the same reason such
a rule appears here.
   The following theorem could be stated for weakly stable structures in addition
to strict ones, but we only need to apply it after the local universes splitting has
occurred, so we don’t bother with that generality.
Theorem 6.9. Let C be a split comprehension category equipped with strictly
stable identity types. If C has strictly stable weak typal pushouts with respect to
one choice of strictly stable dependent identity types and identity applications, then
with respect to any other choice of strictly stable dependent identity types and
identity applications it also has strictly stable weak typal pushouts.
Proof. We use the ordinary notation for the given identity types, dependent identity
                                                                 e
types, identity applications, and typal pushouts, and we write Id
                                                               g
                                                                 B (x, y) and ap
                                                                              gf and
so on for some other choice of dependent identity types and identity applications.
20                PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


Using the eliminators for dependent identity types in both directions (or equivalently
the uniqueness-up-to-homotopy of weak factorization systems), we obtain maps in
both directions making all the triangles commute:

                                     Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.IdA
                                                      B
                              A
                             rB


                Γ.A.B                        k   h            Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B

                             A
                            rf
                             B
                                                      A
                                     Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.Id
                                                    g
                                                      B

Similarly, we obtain homotopies over Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B between the round-trip com-
posites in both directions (i.e. maps Γ.A.B → Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.IdA      A
                                                                 B .IdB .IdIdA
                                                                             B
                                                                               and
                                            A    A
similarly), giving a homotopy equivalence Id ≃ Id . And if we have a section f of
                                               g
                                                     B    B
B ∈ T (Γ.A), then the composite
                        apf                   h
             Γ.A.A.IdA −−→ Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.IdA
                                            B −
                                              → Γ.A.A.IdA .B.B.Id
                                                               g A
                                                                 B

is a lift of (f, f ), and has the property that when composed with rA : Γ.A →
Γ.A.A.IdA it becomes rf   A
                          B . Since ap
                                    gf also has these properties, we can use identity
elimination to produce a homotopy h◦apf ∼ ap  gf over (f, f ), i.e. a lift of (h◦apf , ap
                                                                                       gf )
                       A g A
to Γ.A.A.Id .B.B.Id .Id .Id .
            A
                      g
                        B        B    Id
                                      g  A
                                         B
   Now, note that only the eliminator and computation rules for pushouts refer to
dependent identity types; the formation and introduction rules can be exactly as
given. For the eliminator, all the structure on C in the second case can be used as-
                                            D
given except for u : A → Γ.D.D.Id .C.C.Id  g
                                             D, which we compose with k to produce
                                                     C
data for the given eliminator. This produces a section of the desired form, satisfying
the computation rules s◦νi = ti and with a homotopy aps ◦µ ∼ k◦m. Postcomposing
this homotopy with h (using ordinary Id-elimination) and concatenating with the
above-constructed homotopies h ◦ aps ∼ ap fs and h ◦ k ∼ 1, we get
                            fs ◦ µ ∼ h ◦ aps ◦ µ ∼ h ◦ k ◦ m ∼ m
                            ap
which is what we want. Since everything that went into the construction was
assumed strictly stable, so is the result.                               

Corollary 6.10. For any good model category M , the split comprehension category
(M , F! ) has strictly stable weak typal pushouts, relative to the strictly stable identity
types obtained by strictifying its canonical weakly stable ones, and the dependent
identity types obtained from any of (i)–(iii) on page 12 and the identity applications
obtained from Id-elimination.                                                            
Remark 6.11. As noted in the introduction, from pushout types (and binary sums
and the empty type) we can construct all finite (homotopy) colimits. In particular,
the coequalizer of f, g : A → B is the pushout of [f, g] : A + A → B and the fold
map ∇ : A + A → A. Conversely, the pushout of f1 : A → B1 and f2 : A → B2 can
be constructed as the coequalizer of inl ◦ f1 , inr ◦ f2 : A → B1 + B2 . Thus, to obtain
all finite colimits we could equally well have chosen to treat coequalizers rather than
pushouts; similar issues arise in the construction of both.
                       SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                             21



          Γ ` N type            Γ ` zero : N           Γ, x : N ` succ(x) : N

    Γ, x : N ` C type     Γ ` z : C[zero/x]       Γ, x : N, y : C ` s : C[succ(x)/x]
    Γ, n : N ` nrec(x.C, z, xy.s, n) : C[n/x]      Γ ` nrec(x.C, z, xy.s, zero) ≡ z
        Γ, n : N ` nrec(x.C, z, xy.s, succ(n)) ≡ s[n/x, nrec(x.C, z, xy.s, n)/y]

                         Figure 6. Natural numbers type

                               7. Natural numbers
   As a warm-up for the recursive case, we consider the interpretation of the type
of natural numbers. Though a standard type constructor, this is not considered
explicitly in [LW15]; thus we begin with its local universes theory.
Definition 7.1. In a comprehension category (C, T ), a natural numbers type
over Γ ∈ C is a type N ∈ T (Γ) together with a section zero : Γ → Γ.N and a map
succ : Γ.N → Γ.N over Γ, plus an operation assigning to any type C ∈ T (Γ.N)
equipped with z : Γ → Γ.N.C over zero and s : Γ.N.C → Γ.N.C over succ, a section
f of C such that f ◦ zero = z and f ◦ succ = s ◦ f .
   We say C has weakly stable natural numbers types if for any Γ there is a
natural numbers type N ∈ T (Γ) such that for any σ : ∆ → Γ, (N[σ], zero[σ], succ[σ])
is a natural numbers type over ∆. Similarly, if C is split, it has strictly stable
natural numbers types if it has an operation assigning to each Γ a natural
numbers type N ∈ T (Γ) such that reindexing along any σ : ∆ → Γ preserves natural
numbers types along with their data and specified sections.
  Of course, if C has a terminal object (as it usually does), then the quantification
over Γ in the latter definition follows from the special case Γ = 1. Strictly stable
natural numbers types are the semantic version of the usual rules for a natural
numbers type, shown in fig. 6.
Theorem 7.2. If C satisfies (LF) and has weakly stable natural numbers types,
then C! has strictly stable natural numbers types.
Proof. Condition (LF) provides a terminal object. We take this to be the local
universe for the formation and introduction rules, choosing a weakly stable natural
numbers type over it. For the elimination and computation rules, the local universe
is
                         Y
                    [c :   x : EN .VC ,
                     z : EC (c(zero)),
                         Y
                     s:     x : EN , y : EC (c(x)).EC (c(succ(x)))].                   
   In a good model category,
                      `       the obvious candidate for a natural numbers type is the
countable coproduct n:N 1 of copies of the terminal object, which is automatically
a “natural numbers object” in the usual sense of category theory. As usual, the
problem is that in general this may not be fibrant (though it is in many examples,
such as simplicial sets). But unlike in the preceding sections,
                                                              `it does not suffice to
simply fibrantly replace it. If N is a fibrant replacement of n:N 1, we can extend
the zero and successor operations to it, and for any fibration C  N equipped with
22               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN

                                          `
z and s we can find a section of C over n:N 1 using its universal property
                                                                     `        and then
extend that section to N by lifting against the acyclic cofibration n:N 1 → N.
    However, such a lift will not generally satisfy the computation rules. It might be
possible to choose it cleverly to satisfy the computation rule for zero, but for succ
there is essentially no hope, since the computation rule for succ relates the section
to itself, which is impossible to obtain using a simple lifting property. Thus, we
have to be more clever.
    Let FN denote the endofunctor of M defined by FN (X) = X + 1. Recall that an
endofunctor-algebra for FN is an object X together with a map FN (X) → X. A
natural numbers object in the ordinary sense is precisely an initial such endofunctor-
algebra. And a natural numbers type over the terminal object is precisely a fibrant
FN -algebra N such that any fibration C  N that is also a map of FN -algebras
has an FN -algebra section. This suggests that N is an “initial fibrant FN -algebra”;
we now make this precise using the technology of algebraic weak factorization
systems [GT06, Gar09, Rie11].
    From now on, therefore, we will assume that M is an excellent model category,
i.e. that in addition to being good it is a combinatorial model category. This allows
us to use the technology of algebraically-free monads and algebraic colimits of
monads [Kel80, nLa]. Let TN denote the algebraically-free monad on FN , which
exists since FN is an accessible endofunctor. This means it is a monad TN such
that TN -monad-algebra structures on any object correspond bijectively to FN -
endofunctor-algebra structures on that object, by precomposition with a given
natural transformation FN → TN . By construction of TN , it is also accessible.
    Now, by the construction of [Gar09] and the combinatoriality of M , we have
an accessible fibrant factorization monad R on the arrow category M → , such
that an arrow can be given an R-algebra structure if and only if it is a fibration,
and R preserves codomains. In particular, when restricted to arrows with terminal
codomain, we get an accessible fibrant replacement monad R1 on M itself, such
that an object can be given an R1 -algebra structure if and only if it is fibrant.
                                                        f   g
Moreover, the composite of two R-algebras X −−  Y −− Z naturally acquires an
R-algebra structure such that the commutative square
                                           f
                                      X         Y
                                    gf              g

                                      Z         Z
is a morphism of R-algebras; this is noted for instance in [Rie13, Remark 5.15].
Theorem 7.3. If M is an excellent model category, then (M , F) has a natural
numbers type over 1.
Proof. Consider the algebraic coproduct of monads TN + R1 . By definition, this is
an (accessible) monad such that a (TN + R1 )-algebra structure on an object X is
precisely a pair of a TN -algebra structure (i.e. an FN -endofunctor-algebra structure)
and an (unrelated) R1 -algebra structure. Let N be the initial (TN + R1 )-algebra,
i.e. the free (TN + R1 )-algebra on the initial object, N = (TN + R1 )(∅). Since N is a
TN -algebra, it comes with zero and succ; and since it is an R1 -algebra, it is fibrant.
    Now suppose p : N.C  N is a fibration of FN -endofunctor-algebras. Choose an
R-algebra structure on p. Then the composite N.C  N  1 acquires an R-algebra
                      SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                             23


structure, which is to say that N.C acquires an R1 -algebra structure, such that p
is (not just an R-algebra but) an R1 -algebra map. Since N.C is also a TN -algebra
and p is also a TN -algebra map, it follows that N.C is a (TN + R1 )-algebra and
p is a (TN + R1 )-algebra map. But since N is the initial (TN + R1 )-algebra, any
(TN + R1 )-algebra map with codomain N has a (TN + R1 )-algebra section, and hence
in particular a TN -algebra section, as desired.                                

   It is not clear to us whether these natural numbers types are weakly stable on
(M , F) in general; but we can obtain weak stability with a small modification. Let
Mf denote the subcategory of fibrant objects in M , and (Mf , Ff ) the restriction of
the comprehension category (M , F) to Mf . Note that Mf is the smallest subcategory
of M to which F can be restricted and still be a comprehension category, since
every fibrant object is the comprehension of some fibration over 1. In particular,
any semantics of type theory in (M , F) must land inside Mf , so not much is lost
by this restriction.

Lemma 7.4. For any good model category M , the comprehension category (Mf , Ff )
also satisfies (LF).

Proof. The product of fibrant objects is of course fibrant, and the assumptions on a
good model category ensure that the dependent exponential of a fibration along a
fibration is again a fibration, hence its domain is fibrant if its codomain is.   

   Moreover, any weakly stable structure possesed by (M , F) is also possesed by
(Mf , Ff ). Thus, all our preceding theorems about strictly stable structure in (M , F! )
also apply to (Mf , Ff ,! ).

Theorem 7.5. If M is an excellent model category, then (Mf , Ff ) has weakly
stable natural numbers types.

Proof. It suffices to show that any natural numbers type N over 1 is weakly stable,
which is to say that for any (fibrant!) object Γ the pullback Γ∗ N is a natural numbers
type over Γ. The proof is essentially the usual category-theoretic argument that
pullback functors preserve natural numbers objects. Suppose C  Γ∗ N is a fibration
over Γ equipped with a section z : Γ → C over Γ∗ (zero) and a map s : C → C
over Γ∗ (succ). Then (since Γ is fibrant) Γ∗ C  Γ∗ Γ∗ N is a fibration, equipped
with a point Γ∗ (z) : Γ∗ (Γ∗ (1)) = Γ∗ (Γ) → Γ∗ (C) over Γ∗ (Γ∗ (zero)) and a map
Γ∗ (s) : Γ∗ (C) → Γ∗ (C) over Γ∗ (Γ∗ (succ)).
   Now pull Γ∗ C back to N along the unit ηN of the adjunction Γ∗ a Γ∗ . Since η
is natural we have Γ∗ (Γ∗ (zero)) ◦ η1 = ηN ◦ zero and Γ∗ (Γ∗ (succ)) ◦ ηN = ηN ◦ succ,
so we have an induced map z 0 : 1 → ηN∗ Γ∗ C over zero and s0 : ηN∗ Γ∗ C → ηN∗ Γ∗ C
over succ. Thus, using nrec for N we have a section f : N → ηN∗ Γ∗ C such that
f ◦ zero = z 0 and f ◦ succ = s0 ◦ f , or equivalently a map g : N → Γ∗ C over ηN such
that g ◦ zero = Γ∗ (z) ◦ η1 and g ◦ succ = Γ∗ (s) ◦ g. Finally, transposing g across
the adjunction Γ∗ a Γ∗ , we obtain Γ∗ N → C over 1N (the adjunct of ηN ) such that
h ◦ Γ∗ (zero) = z and h ◦ Γ∗ (succ) = s ◦ h, as desired.                             

Corollary 7.6. If M is an excellent model category, then (Mf , Ff ,! ) has strictly
stable natural numbers types.                                                    
24                PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


                                       8. W-types
   The construction of W-types is similar to that of natural numbers, with one
additional wrinkle. Namely, the presence of parameters means that in weak stability
we have to consider pullback along arbitrary morphisms σ : ∆ → Γ between fibrant
objects, and in the case when Γ is not terminal, fibrancy of ∆ does not imply that
σ is a fibration.
   Since a good model category is locally cartesian closed, the weakly stable Π-types
in (M , F) asserted by Theorem 2.6 are actually pseudo-stable [LW15, Definition
3.4.2.8]; thus we can use the definition of weakly stable W-types relative to these
from [LW15, Definition 3.4.4.9].
Theorem 8.1. If M is an excellent model category, then (M , F) has W-types.
That is, for any Γ ∈ M , A ∈ F(Γ), and B ∈ F(Γ.A), there exists a W-type as
in [LW15, Definition 3.4.4.7].
Proof. Let FWAB be the endofunctor of M /Γ sending X → Γ to the local exponential
(A∗ X)B                                                ∗   B
       A , equipped with the composite projection (A X)A → A → Γ. Since this is
a composite of left or right adjoints between accessible categories, it is an accessible
endofunctor, and M /Γ is locally presentable, so FWAB generates an algebraically-
free monad TWAB . Let Γ.W be the initial algebra of TWAB + RΓ , where RΓ is the
restriction of R to morphisms with target Γ. Then Γ.W → Γ is a fibration, since
it is an R-algebra, and its FWAB -endofunctor-algebra structure is exactly the map
fold required of a W-type.
    The input to the eliminator consists, as usual, of a fibration p : Γ.W.C 
Γ.W that is a FWAB -algebra morphism. This is not completely obvious, with the
eliminator defined following syntax as in [LW15, Definition 3.4.4.7]; the point is that
Γ.A.Π[B, W].Π[B, C[app0B,W ]] ∼  = Γ.A.Π[B, Σ[W, C]] by the mapping-in universal
property of Σ-types; and by construction of Σ-types in M , the comprehension
Γ.Σ[W, C]  Γ is just the composite Γ.W.C  Γ.W  Γ.4) As before, we choose an
R-algebra structure on p, making this composite Γ.W.C  Γ.W  Γ an R-algebra
and the square
                                  Γ.W.C         Γ.W


                                   Γ           Γ
an R-algebra map, hence also a (TWAB + RΓ )-algebra map. Thus, since W is the
initial (TWAB + RΓ )-algebra, this morphism has a (TWAB + RΓ )-algebra section,
and in particular a FWAB -endofunctor-algebra section, which is wrec.        
Remark 8.2. In [vdBM15] it is shown that 1-categorical W-types in simplicial sets
and certain other well-behaved model categories automatically preserve fibrancy.
But in the general case we need to include a fibrant replacement, as before.
Theorem 8.3. If M is an excellent model category, then (Mf , Ff ) has weakly
stable W-types.
Proof. Let W  Γ be a W-type constructed as above for Γ ∈ M , A ∈ F(Γ), and
B ∈ F(Γ.A); we must show that its pullback along any σ : ∆ → Γ is also a W-type.
   4Note a typo in [LW15, Definition 3.4.4.7]: each Γ.W. · · · in the left-hand columns of the
diagrams should be Γ.A. · · · .
                        SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                                25


We consider separately the cases when σ is an acyclic cofibration or a fibration; by
factorization this suffices for the general case.
   If σ is a fibration, the argument is similar to that of Theorem 7.5. Suppose given
a fibration C  σ ∗ W over ∆ with structure map d over σ ∗ (fold):
                                                                       d
                (σ ∗ A)! (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C                                                  C

                                                      ∼
                                                      =
              (σ ∗ A)! (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ σ ∗ W                 σ ∗ (f∗ B ∗ W)                σ∗ W
                                                                                 σ ∗ (fold)

Then using several Beck-Chevalley transformations, we have a composite map
                 ∼                           ∼
  A! f∗ B ∗ σ∗ C −
                 → A! f∗ (B ∗ σ)∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C −
                                             → A! (A∗ σ)∗ (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C
                                                                                                     σ d
                                                          → σ∗ (σ ∗ A)! (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C −−
                                                                                              ∗
                                                                                               → σ∗ C
that lies over the corresponding map for σ ∗ W constructed from σ ∗ (fold). Now if we
pull this back along the unit ηW : W → σ∗ σ ∗ W we get a map d0 satisfying
                                                           d0
                               A! f ∗ B ∗ η W
                                            ∗
                                              σ∗ C                    ∗
                                                                     ηW σ∗ C


                                                          fold
                                   A! f ∗ B ∗ W                        W
                                     ∗
and thus a section wrec : W → ηW       σ∗ C commuting with d0 and fold. Transposing
                                     ∗
this back across the adjunction σ a σ∗ , we obtain a section of C commuting with
d and σ ∗ (fold), as desired.
   On the other hand, if σ is an acyclic cofibration, then so is its pullback W∗ σ :
 ∗
σ W → W along the fibration W  Γ. Moreover, since ∆ is fibrant, so is the
object σ ∗ W. Therefore, the acyclic cofibration W∗ σ admits a retraction r. Since
(W∗ σ)∗ r∗ C ∼
             = C, it suffices to extend the given structure d on the fibration C  σ ∗ W
to a corresponding structure on r∗ C  W whose pullback to σ ∗ W is d. This is
contained in the following lemma.                                                      
Lemma 8.4. Suppose a pair of pullback squares in a good model category M :
                                                      i
                                           C          ∼     D
                                          p       y              q
                                                      j
                                           V          ∼     W
                                                  y
                                                      σ
                                           ∆          ∼     Γ
in which all objects are fibrant, the downward-pointing arrows are fibrations, and
the rightward-pointing arrows are acyclic cofibrations. Suppose moreover that for
some fibration f : B  A between fibrant objects of M /Γ, the object W of M /Γ is
a FWAB -endofunctor-algebra, the object C is a FW(σ∗ A)(σ∗ B) -endofunctor-algebra,
and p is a FW(σ∗ A)(σ∗ B) -morphism (when V has its induced structure from W ).
Then there is a FWAB -endofunctor-algebra structure on D inducing the structure
on C by pullback and making q a FWAB -morphism.
Proof. By definition, FWAB (X) = f∗ B ∗ X (with its canonical map to A forgotten),
and similarly FW(σ∗ A)(σ∗ B) (X) = (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ X. Thus we are given the following
26               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


commutative diagram of solid arrows and we want to construct the dashed arrow
making the other squares commute:
                 (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C                             f∗ B ∗ D


                                                   C                         i
                                                                                     D


                 (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ V                             f∗ B ∗ W           q
                                                       p


                                                   V                  j
                                                                                     W

This is equivalent to solving the following lifting problem:
                       (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C                   C                  D


                            f∗ B ∗ D                       f∗ B ∗ W              W
so it suffices to show that (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C → f∗ B ∗ D is an acyclic cofibration. Now
since C = σ ∗ D, we have (σ ∗ B)∗ C = σ ∗ B ∗ D, so the map (σ ∗ B)∗ C → B ∗ D is
a pullback of σ along the composite fibration B ∗ D → D → Γ, hence an acyclic
cofibration. But (σ ∗ B)∗ C is also the pullback of B ∗ D along the map B ∗ σ : σ ∗ B → B,
so by the Beck-Chevalley condition for the pullback square
                                                       B∗ σ
                                            σ∗ B        ∼     B
                                        σ∗ f                   f
                                                       A∗ σ
                                            σ∗ A        ∼     A
we have (σ f )∗ (σ B) C ∼
           ∗      ∗    ∗
                           = (A σ) f∗ B D. Thus, our desired map (σ ∗ B)∗ C → B ∗ D
                                  ∗     ∗      ∗

is equivalently the pullback (A∗ σ)∗ f∗ B ∗ D → f∗ B ∗ D of the acyclic cofibration A∗ σ
along the fibration f∗ B ∗ D  A, and hence an acyclic cofibration.                   
Corollary 8.5. If M is an excellent model category, then (Mf , Ff ,! ) has strictly
stable W-types.                                                                  

     9. A higher inductive type not constructible from pushouts
   As mentioned in §1, it is known that (at least in the presence of a universe) many
recursive higher inductive types can in fact be constructed using only pushouts
and the natural numbers, including all n-truncations and some localizations. Thus,
it seems worthwhile to give explicitly an example of a higher inductive type that
cannot be so constructed.
   Briefly, the idea is that higher inductive types can be used to construct free
algebras for infinitary algebraic theories. However, Blass showed (modulo a large
cardinal assumption) that these cannot be constructed in ZF [Bla83]. Therefore, no
higher inductive types that are modelled by ZF can suffice to construct these.
   To give this in detail, we work internally, and write x = y instead of Id(x, y). Let
even, odd : N → N be the inclusions of the even and odd numbers respectively, and
let par : N → N + N be the inverse of the bijection [even, odd] : N + N → N. Given
                         SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                        27

                                                                                par         [f,g]
functions f, g : N → A, we write f ∪g : N → A for the composite N −−→ N+N −−−→ A.
And given a : A, we write {a} : N → A for the constant function at a.
   Now let F be the higher inductive type generated by the following constructors
(some numbered for later reference). Intuitively, F can be thought of as a set of
notations for countable ordinals, so that its existence implies that of an ordinal of
uncountable cofinality.
  • 0 : F.
  • S : F → F.
  • sup : (N → F) → F.
  • F is a 0-type. As in [Uni13, §7.3] we can ensure this with two constructors:
       • h : (S 1 → F) → F.
       • For each r : S 1 → F and x : S 1 , an identification r(x) = h(r).
(1) For any f, g : N → N such that ∀n.((∃m.f (m) = n) ↔ (∃m.g(m) = n)), and
    any h : N → F, we have sup(h ◦ f ) = sup(h ◦ g).
(2) For any f, g : N → F we have sup(f ∪ {sup(f ∪ g)}) = sup(f ∪ g).
(3) For any f, g : N → F we have sup(f ∪ {S(sup(f ∪ g))}) = S(sup(f ∪ g)).
(4) This constructor requires some setup. Fix a bijection pair : N × N → N; then
    suppose given b, c : N → N jointly surjective, and L : N → N → N such that
    ∀n.∃m, `.(L(b(m), `) = c(n)) and ∀n.∃m, `.(L(c(m), `) = b(n)). For h : N → F,
    set h0 (n) = sup(h ◦ L(n)). Now given such h, take by induction h0 = h, hk+1 =
    h0k ; then set fk = hk ◦ b and gk = hk ◦ c, and finally f (pair(k, n)) = fk (n) and
    g(pair(k, n)) = gk (n). Note that for each i, f (i), g(i) are algebraic expressions
    in the variables h under the operation sup.
        Now the constructor says: for each such b, c, L, and h, sup(f ) = sup(g).
(5) sup({0}) = 0.
Theorem 9.1 (cf. [Bla83, §9]). Assuming excluded middle and the higher inductive
type F, there exists an uncountable regular cardinal.
Proof. The constructors of F correspond to the operations and the similarly-
numbered axioms of the variety of algebras considered in [Bla83, §9]. For (2), (3)
and (5) this is fairly obvious.
   Axiom (1) of [Bla83, §9] is sup(x0 , x1 , . . . ) = sup(y0 , y1 , . . . ), where {x0 , x1 , . . . }
and {y0 , y1 , . . . } are equal subsets of some fixed countably infinite set of variables.
The enumerations of such variables x0 , x1 , . . . and y0 , y1 , . . . therefore correspond
to f, g : N → N, and the hypothesis of our (1) says that these have the same image.
   It is not entirely clear to us how axiom (4) of [Bla83, §9] is to be interpreted
as an equation of an algebraic theory; its statement appears to be conditional on
certain equalities, hence essentially-algebraic rather than algebraic. Our (4) is a
modification (which may have been essentially what was intended in [Bla83, §9])
that is algebraic and satisfies the following two necessary properties.
   First, we need that the canonical supremum operation on ordinal numbers
satisfies (4) (with F interpreted as the ordinals). To see this, note that the assumption
on L ensures that for any h, for each n there is an m with h(b(n)) ≤ h0 (c(m)), and
dually. Thus, for any k, n there is an m with fk (n) ≤ gk+1 (m), and dually. Thus f
and g are mutually cofinal, hence have the same supremum.
   Second, in the proof of Subcase 3.1 in [Bla83, §9], we need (4) to imply that
if h : N → F satisfies h(n) = sup({ h(m) | m ≤ n }), and b, c : N → N are jointly
surjective and each cofinal, then sup(h ◦ b) = sup(h ◦ c). To see this, let L(n) : N → N
28              PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


                   Γ ` A type                        Γ ` A type
                  Γ ` kAk type                 Γ, x : A ` tr(x) : kAk

                                     Γ ` A type
                    Γ, x : kAk, y : kAk ` treq(x, y) : IdkAk (x, y)

          Γ ` A type       Γ, z : kAk ` C type      Γ, x : A ` c : C[tr(x)/z]
                                                               treq(x,y)
           Γ, x : kAk, y : kAk, u : C[x/z], v : C[y/z] ` d : Idz.C       (u, v)
                   Γ, w : kAk ` trrec(z.C, x.c, xyuv.d, a) : C[w/z]
                   Γ, a : A ` trrec(z.C, x.c, xyuv.d, tr(a)) ≡ c[a/x]

                        Figure 7. Propositional truncation

be an enumeration of { m | m ≤ n }; then cofinality ensures the hypothesis of (4),
while the other assumption ensures that h0 = h. Using (1), therefore, we have
sup(h ◦ b) = sup(f ) = sup(g) = sup(h ◦ c).
   Now the proof of [Bla83, §9] applies to derive a contradiction from the assumption
that ω is the only infinite regular cardinal.                                       
Corollary 9.2. If it is consistent with ZFC that there are arbitrarily large strongly
compact cardinals, then ZF does not prove that the higher inductive type F exists
in Set. In particular, since Set models type theory with pushouts and natural
numbers, under this assumption F cannot be constructed from pushouts and the
natural numbers.
Proof. As in [Bla83, §9], this follows from Gitik’s [Git80] construction of a model
of ZF with no uncountable regular cardinals, assuming the stated large cardinal
principle.                                                                       
   Thus, there is real extra power in recursive higher inductive types, above and
beyond that obtainable by combining non-recursive higher inductive types and
recursive ordinary inductive types.

                         10. Propositional truncation
   Having dealt with both higher path-constructors in §§4–6 and recursive point-
constructors in §§7–8, we now combine them and consider a type with a recursive
path-constructor. One of the simplest such is the propositional truncation, whose
type-theoretic rules are shown in fig. 7. According to the usual pattern, there should
be a second computation rule regarding treq; but the typal form of this (which, as
in §6, is all we will obtain eventually) follows automatically since everything is a
proposition, so we do not bother to posit it separately. The semantic version of this
definition is as follows.
Definition 10.1. Let C be a comprehension category with stable classes of identity
types and dependent identity types. A stable class of propositional truncations
consists of, for any A ∈ T (Γ) a non-empty family of “good propositional truncations”
kAk ∈ T (Γ) with morphisms tr : Γ.A → Γ.kAk over Γ, and for any good identity
type IdkAk a non-empty family of sections treq of the projection Γ.kAk.kAk.IdkAk 
                       SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                               29


Γ.kAk.kAk, plus for any C ∈ T (Γ.kAk) equipped with a section t : Γ.A → Γ.kAk.C
                                           kAk
over tr, a good dependent identity type IdC over IdkAk , and a section of the
                                       kAk
projection Γ.kAk.kAk.IdkAk .C.C.IdC → Γ.kAk.kAk.C.C over treq, a section trrec
of C such that trrec ◦ tr = t; all equipped with appropriate reindexing operations.
We say C has strictly stable propositional truncations if it has a stable class
thereof in which each family of good structures is a singleton.

  The local universes coherence lemma is proven as usual; we combine it with the
analogue of Theorem 6.9.

Lemma 10.2. If C satisfies (LF) and has a stable class of propositional truncations
relative to some stable classes of identity types and dependent identity types, then
C! has strictly stable propositional truncations relative to the identity types obtained
by strictifying the given ones and any dependent identity types over these.

Proof. The local universe for the formation and introduction rules is just VA , while
that for the elimination and computation rules is

        [a : VA ,
             Y
         c:     z : EkAk (a).VC
            Y
         t:     x : EA (a).EC (c(tr(x)))
             Y
         d:      x, y : EkAk (a), u : EC (c(x)), v : EC (c(y)).EIdkAk (a, x, y, u, v)]
                                                                   C


And if C has eliminator data relative to some other dependent identity types, then
by composing it with the map k from Theorem 6.9 we obtain eliminator data for
the given strictified ones, allowing us to define the desired section.          

   Passing to the model-categorical context, it is useful to isolate the following
definition.

Definition 10.3. A morphism X → Γ in a good model category is a proposition
                                                              1
over Γ if it is equipped with a section of the projection XΓ∆ → X ×Γ X, i.e. a
simplicial homotopy over Γ between the two projections X ×Γ X ⇒ X. A map of
propositions over Γ is a map over Γ that preserves these sections (or homotopies).

   Note that when interpreted with respect to the canonical identity types and
dependent identity types in a good model category, the introduction rule for kAk
says that it is a fibrant proposition with a map from A, and the elimination rule
says that any fibration over kAk that is a map of propositions and has a section
over A has a section over kAk.
   Definition 10.3 does not require X → Γ to be a fibration, but when it is, the
definition has the following reformulations.

Lemma 10.4. The following are equivalent for a fibration p : X  Γ in a good
model category.
   (i) p admits some structure of a proposition over Γ.
  (ii) The diagonal X → X ×Γ X is a weak equivalence.
 (iii) The diagonal X → X ×Γ X is an acyclic cofibration.
30               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


Proof. The diagonal is always a split mono, hence a cofibration, so (ii)⇔(iii) is easy.
And (iii)⇒(i) by lifting in the square
                                            r           1
                                  X               XΓ∆
                                   ∼

                               X ×Γ X            X ×Γ X
in which the right-hand map is a fibration since p is a fibration, as in Theorem 5.2.
Finally, if (i) then any two parallel maps over Γ with target X are simplicially
homotopic, by composing with the specified section. Thus, consider either projection
X ×Γ X → X; this is a retraction of the diagonal, while the composite X ×Γ X →
X → X ×Γ X is simplicially homotopic to the identity by the above. Thus the
diagonal is a simplicial homotopy equivalence.                                     

Lemma 10.5. Given a proposition X  Γ over Γ in a good model category, the
following are equivalent for a further fibration Y  X.
   (i) Y  X admits some structure of a proposition over X.
  (ii) the composite Y  X  Γ admits some structure of a proposition over Γ.
 (iii) the composite Y  X  Γ admits some structure of a proposition over Γ
       such that Y → X is a map of propositions.
Proof. We have a pullback square
                                             ∼
                               Y ×X Y            Y ×Γ Y
                                        y
                                         ∼
                                  X              X ×Γ X
in which the right-hand map is a fibration (the product of two fibrations in M /Γ) and
the bottom map is an acyclic cofibration by Lemma 10.4, hence the top map is also
an acyclic cofibration. Thus, by the 2-out-of-3 property, the diagonal Y → Y ×X Y
is a weak equivalence (i.e. Y can be structured as a proposition over X) if and only
if the diagonal Y → Y ×Γ Y is a weak equivalence (i.e. Y can be structured as a
proposition over Γ). Moreover, in this case we can structure Y as a proposition over
Γ making Y → X a map of propositions by lifting in the following square:
                                                        1
                         Y                        YΓ∆
                           ∼
                                                               1
                      Y ×Γ Y           (Y ×Γ Y ) ×(X×Γ X) XΓ∆

Here the right-hand map is a fibration since it is the pullback corner product in
M /Γ of the fibration Y  X and the cofibration 2 → ∆1 , so such a lift exists. 

   The following proof introduces one more new idea: algebraic pushouts of monads
to “glue in recursive paths”.
Theorem 10.6. If M is an excellent model category, then (Mf , Ff ) has a stable class
of propositional truncations relative to its canonical stable classes of identity types
and dependent identity types, and hence (Mf , Ff ,! ) has strictly stable propositional
truncations.
                      SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                           31


Proof. Let F∆1 be the endofunctor of M /Γ defined by F∆1 (X) = (X ×Γ X) ⊗ ∆1 .
Then an F∆1 -endofunctor-algebra structure on X consists of a simplicial homotopy
between two maps X ×Γ X ⇒ X. These two maps can be arbitrary and are given
as part of the algebra structure, but we can identify them with the projections by
taking an algebraic colimit of monads.
   If we define F2 (X) = (X ×Γ X) ⊗ 2, then an F2 -endofunctor-algebra structure
consists of two maps X ×Γ X ⇒ X. Moreover, there is a natural transformation
F2 → F∆1 such that the induced functor from F∆1 -endofunctor-algebras to F2 -
endofunctor-algebras forgets the homotopy but remembers the maps. And if T2 and
T∆1 denote the algebraically-free monads on these (accessible) endofunctors, we
have an induced monad morphism T2 → T∆1 that has the same effect on algebras.
   Let Id denote the identity functor with its unique monad structure, so that every
object has a unique Id-algebra structure. Every object also has a natural (though
not unique) T2 -algebra structure consisting of the two projections, so there is a
monad morphism T2 → Id. Let TProp be the algebraic monad pushout:


                                   T2           Id


                                  T∆1         TProp


By definition, this means that a TProp -algebra structure on an object consists
precisely of a T∆1 -algebra structure and (the unique) Id-algebra structure whose
underlying T2 -algebra structures coincide. In other words, a TProp -algebra is exactly
a proposition over Γ.
   Finally, consider the algebraic monad coproduct TProp + RΓ , and let kAk =
(TProp + RΓ )(A). (More precisely, we define a “good” propositional truncation to
be a fibration over Γ equipped with an isomorphism to (TProp + RΓ )(A).) Then
kAk → Γ is a fibration, since it is an RΓ -algebra, and kAk is a proposition since it
is a TProp -algebra, while the unit of the monad TProp + RΓ supplies tr : A → kAk.
   The eliminator data consists of a fibration p : C  kAk that is also a TProp -
algebra morphism, together with a map t : A → C over tr. As usual, we choose
an R-algebra structure on p, inducing an R-algebra structure on the composite
C  kAk  Γ such that p becomes an R-algebra morphism. Thus, t : A → C is
a map from A to a (TProp + RΓ )-algebra, so it factors uniquely through the free
(TProp + RΓ )-algebra on A, which by definition is kAk. And when we compose this
factorization f : kAk → C with p, we get a factorization of tr through itself, which
must therefore be the identity; thus f is a section of p as desired.
   It remains to prove weak stability. Since pullback preserves limits and simplicial
homotopies, it preserves the introduction rule, i.e. it takes propositions to proposi-
tions. For elimination and computation, as in Theorem 8.3 we deal separately with
the cases when σ : ∆ → Γ is a fibration or an acyclic cofibration.
   If σ is a fibration and C  σ ∗ kAk is a fibration of propositions over ∆, then
as usual we have a fibration σ∗ C  σ∗ σ ∗ kAk over Γ. Moreover, σ∗ also preserves
propositions, since it is a simplicial right adjoint and hence preserves limits and
simplicial homotopies. Thus, σ∗ C → σ∗ σ ∗ kAk is also a fibration of propositions
over Γ, while the unit η : kAk → σ∗ σ ∗ kAk is a map of propositions. Thus, the
pullback η ∗ σ∗ C  kAk is also a proposition over Γ. Moreover, if C has a section
32                 PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


over σ ∗ A, then σ∗ C has a section over A, which therefore extends to a section of
η ∗ σ∗ C, i.e. a map kAk → σ∗ C over η. This transposes to a section of C, as desired.
    On the other hand, if σ is an acyclic cofibration, then so is kAk ∗ σ : σ ∗ kAk → kAk,
since kAk  Γ is a fibration. Since ∆ is fibrant, so is σ ∗ kAk, and so just as in
Theorem 8.3 kAk ∗ σ admits a retraction r. Now suppose C  σ ∗ kAk is a fibration
of propositions over ∆, with a section c over σ ∗ A. Then r∗ C  kAk is a fibration
whose pullback along σ is C, and by lifting in the following square
                            σ∗ A     c
                                          C∼
                                           = σ∗ r∗ C            r∗ C
                               ∼

                             A                                  kAk
we obtain a section of r∗ C over A whose pullback to ∆ is the given c. Moreover,
since C ∼
        = σ ∗ r∗ C, we have the following commutative square
                                              ∼
                                    C                  r∗ C
                                     ∼
                                             ∼
                                 C ×∆ C            r ∗ C ×Γ r ∗ C
in which all maps except the right-hand one are known to be weak equivalences:
the left-hand one since C is a proposition over Γ, the top since it is a pullback of
the weak equivalence σ along a fibration, and the bottom since it is a homotopy
pullback of weak equivalences. Thus, by 2-out-of-3 the right-hand map is also a weak
equivalence, i.e. r∗ C is a proposition over Γ. Therefore, by Lemma 10.5, we can give
it the structure of a proposition such that r∗ C → kAk is a map of propositions. So
we can apply trrec to obtain a section of it, which pulls back to the desired section
of C.                                                                               

                                     11. Cell monads
   At this point we have enough examples to motivate and formulate a general
notion of higher inductive type on the semantic side, although it remains an open
problem to give a syntactic presentation of equal generality. In this section we
consider “higher inductive types” without parameters; in the next section we will
generalize to allow parameters.
   We start with a very general notion of “typal initial algebra” in the comprehension
category context for which we can isolate the conditions necessary to prove the local
universes coherence theorem.
Definition 11.1. For any category C, a fibred category of structures over C
is a comprehension category structure (C, S) such that the functor S → C → is a
faithful amnestic isofibration.5 We call an object of S an S-algebra, and we call a
lifting of (X → Γ) ∈ C → to S an S-structure on it. We call a morphism in S an
S-morphism.
   Note that by the assumptions on S, the collection of S-structures on any X → Γ
is a partially ordered set (not just a preordered set).

   5Recall that a functor U : A → B is amnestic if whenever f : a ∼ b is an isomorphism in A
                                                                     =
such that U a = U b and U f = 1U a , then also a = b and f = 1a . It is an isofibration if for any
isomorphism g : U a ∼
                    = b, there exists an isomorphism f : a ∼
                                                           = a0 such that U a0 = b and U f = g.
                      SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                             33


Definition 11.2. Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category, and let S be a fibred
category of structures over C (note that there is no relation between S and T ). A
typal initial S-algebra over Γ is a type H ∈ T (Γ) together with an S-structure
on its comprehension Γ.H → Γ, such that for any C ∈ T (Γ.H) together with an
S-algebra structure on the composite Γ.H.C → Γ.H → Γ such that Γ.H.C → Γ.H
is an S-morphism, there exists a section Γ.H → Γ.H.C of Γ.H.C → Γ.H that is
also an S-morphism.
   We say C has weakly stable typal initial S-algebras if for any Γ there exists
a typal initial S-algebra over Γ whose reindexing along any σ : ∆ → Γ is again a
typal initial S-algebra. If C is split, we say it has strictly stable typal initial
S-algebras if we have an operation assigning to each Γ a typal initial S-algebra
over Γ with specified S-algebra sections, in a way that is strictly preserved by the
split reindexing functors.
Definition 11.3. Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category and S a fibred category
of structures over C. Given A ∈ T (Γ) and B ∈ T (Γ.A) and any S-structure A on
Γ.A → Γ, an S-lift of A to B is an S-structure on the composite Γ.A.B → Γ.A → Γ
such that Γ.A.B → Γ.A becomes an S-morphism over Γ. We say that S has
representable lifts if for any A, B, A , the functor (C/Γ)op → Set defined by
(11.4)                (σ : ∆ → Γ) 7→ {S-lifts of A [σ] to B[σ]}
is representable. In other words, there exists a map $ : VA ,B → Γ and an S-lift B
of A [$] to B[$], such that for any σ : ∆ → Γ and any S-lift B 0 of A [σ] to B[σ],
there is a unique map τ : ∆ → VA ,B such that $ ◦ τ = σ and B 0 = B[τ ].
   Note that the notion of representable lift does involve both S and T , and also
that the assumptions on S ensure that the functor (11.4) really does sensibly take
values in (partially ordered) sets (rather than groupoids or categories).
Lemma 11.5. Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category and S a fibred category
of structures over C. If C has weakly stable typal initial S-algebras, C has a
terminal object, and S has representable lifts, then C! has strictly stable typal initial
S-algebras.
Proof. Choose a weakly stable typal initial S-algebra H ∈ T (1) with S-structure
H , and let VH = 1 and EH = H with pHq = 1. Then assign to each Γ the algebra
(VH , EH , !); this is strictly stable by composition of names, as usual. That is, since
the “formation” and “introduction” rules (which jointly correspond to a choice of
S-structure on the comprehension of a type) have no premises, their local universe
is the terminal object.
    For the elimination rule, given a type C ∈ T! (Γ.H[Γ]) determined by (VC , EC , pCq),
consider first the object V = VH / VC constructed as in [LW15], which classifies maps
∆ → VH = 1 (which are unique) together with maps ∆.H[∆] → VC . In particular,
we have a universal map c : V.H[V ] → VC giving EC [c] ∈ T (V.H[V ]).
    Now, by representable lifts, we have a map VH [V ],EC [c] → V representing lifts of
the S-structure H [V ] of H[V ] to EC [c]. Combining universal properties, we see
that maps Γ → VH [V ],EC [c] correspond to choices of a map pCq : Γ.H[Γ] → VC
together with a lift of H [Γ] to EC [pCq]. This is exactly the input to the “elimination
and computation rules” of a typal initial S-algebra, so we take VH [V ],EC [c] as the
local universe for that. The weak stability of H implies that the universal lift over
34               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


VH [V ],EC [c] has a section that is an S-morphism, which we can then reindex to Γ to
obtain a strictly stable eliminator.                                               
   Note that we did not yet need to explicitly assume all of (LF); the assumption
of representable lifts encodes all of this that’s relevant to S.
   Now we move on to good model categories. In this case, our work in previous
sections suggests that we should consider structures defined as the algebras for a
monad. To obtain a fibred category of algebras, we need to consider fibred monads
as well.
Definition 11.6. A fibred monad on a category C with pullbacks is a monad T on
C → in the category of fibrations over C. That is, T and its unit η and multiplication µ
live in the (strict) slice 2-category of Cat over C, meaning that T preserves codomains
and the codomain-part of η and µ are the identity, and also T preserves cartesian
morphisms.
    In particular, such a T induces a monad TΓ on each slice category C/Γ, and
each pullback functor σ ∗ : C/Γ → C/∆ is a strong monad morphism, i.e. it satisfies
σ ∗ TΓ ∼
       = T∆ σ ∗ coherently. That is, a fibred monad is equivalently an indexed monad.
    Let T-Alg denote the category of T-algebras, which is again fibred over C; the
fiberwiseness of η means that the fiber of T-Alg over Γ is TΓ -Alg. We record:
Lemma 11.7. For any fibred monad T on a category C with pullbacks, T-Alg is a
fibred category of structures over C.                                      
Lemma 11.8. If T is a fibred monad on a model category M , then the full
subcategory T-Alg f of T-Alg consisting of T-algebra structures on fibrations over
fibrant objects is a fibred category of structures over the full subcategory of fibrant
objects Mf .                                                                         
   The question, therefore, is what conditions we can impose on T to ensure that
(1) (Mf , Ff ) has weakly stable initial T-Alg f -structures, and
(2) T-Alg f has representable lifts.
It is familiar from homotopy theory that an algebraic theory (such as an operad or,
in this case, a monad) must be sufficiently “cofibrant” to have good homotopical
behavior. Cofibrant objects, in turn, are generally constructed as “cell complexes”.
Inspecting our proofs of weak stability in the preceding sections leads us to the
following definitions.
Lemma 11.9. Let M be a locally presentable category, and F a fibred endofunctor
of M such that each fiber FΓ is accessible. Let TΓ be the algebraically-free monad
on FΓ . Then these monads TΓ are also indexed, i.e. we have coherent isomorphisms
T∆ ◦ σ ∗ ∼
         = σ ∗ ◦ TΓ commuting with the monad structures, and hence induce a fibred
monad T.
Proof. As explained in [Kel80, nLa], TΓ is constructed out of colimits in M using a
general method that depends on FΓ only insofar as we have to carry it out to some
stage κ such that FΓ is κ-accessible. It doesn’t matter whether we go “too far”, since
the construction converges: once we reach a κ such that FΓ is κ-accessible, continuing
to larger values of κ doesn’t change the result. Therefore, given σ : ∆ → Γ, we can
choose κ such that FΓ and F∆ are both κ-accessible, and then both TΓ and T∆ can
be constructed by exactly the same colimits, only involving FΓ and F∆ respectively.
                     SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                            35


Since σ ∗ preserves all colimits, the isomorphisms F∆ ◦ σ ∗ ∼
                                                            = σ ∗ ◦ FΓ therefore yield
                      ∗ ∼ ∗
isomorphisms T∆ ◦ σ = σ ◦ TΓ , and so on.                                           
   Now let M be an excellent model category. For any fibration f : B → A of
fibrant objects in M and any Γ ∈ M , let FΓf be the polynomial endofunctor of
M /Γ determined by Γ∗ (f ), i.e. the composite
                    Γ∗ (B)∗             Γ∗ (f )∗           Γ∗ (A)!
             M /Γ −−−−−→ M /Γ∗ (B) −−−−→ M /Γ∗ (A) −−−−→ M /Γ
By the Beck-Chevalley condition for dependent exponentials, FΓf is an indexed
endofunctor, hence we have an fibred endofunctor F f , which is moreover (fiberwise)
accessible.
   Next, for any simplicial set K we have a further fibred endofunctor F f ⊗ K,
which is again accessible. We denote the free fibred monad it generates by Tf,K .
Finally, for any morphism i : K → L of simplicial sets, we have an induced map
F f ⊗ K → F f ⊗ L, which generates a map of fibred monads Tf,K → Tf,L .
Definition 11.10. Let M be an excellent model category.
 • A monad cell is a fibred monad morphism Tf,K → Tf,L obtained as above
    from a fibration f : B → A of fibrant objects in M and a cofibration i : K → L
    of simplicial sets.
 • A (finite) relative cell monad is a fibred monad morphism obtained as a
   (finite) composite of pushouts of monad cells.
 • A (finite) cell monad is a fibred monad T such that the unique map from the
    initial fibred monad (which is the identity Id) is a (finite) relative cell monad.
   As in previous sections, the proof of weak stability for typal initial T-algebras
will proceed by considering separately the cases when σ is a fibration or an acyclic
cofibration. For the fibration case, the relevant lemma will be the following.
Lemma 11.11. For any fibred monad T on a good model category M , and any
morphism σ : ∆ → Γ, the adjunction σ ∗ : M /Γ  M /∆ : σ∗ lifts to an adjunction
σ ∗ : TΓ -Alg → T∆ -Alg : σ∗ .
Proof. Since σ ∗ is a strong monad morphism, by doctrinal adjunction [Kel74] the
entire adjunction σ ∗ a σ∗ lifts to the 2-category of categories-with-monads and
lax monad morphisms. But the construction of categories of algebras is functorial
on this 2-category, hence takes this adjunction to the desired adjunction between
categories of algebras.                                                         
   For the acyclic cofibration case, the relevant lemma will be the following analogue
of Lemma 8.4.
Lemma 11.12. Let S → T be a relative cell monad on an excellent model category,
and suppose given a pair of pullback squares:
                                            i
                                    C       ∼      D
                                    p   y          q
                                            j
                                    V       ∼      W
                                        y
                                            σ
                                    ∆       ∼      Γ
              36                    PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


              in which all objects are fibrant, the downward-pointing arrows are fibrations, and
              the rightward-pointing arrows are acyclic cofibrations. Suppose moreover that:
                 (i) C and V are T∆ -algebras and p is a T∆ -morphism,
                (ii) W is a TΓ -algebra and j is a cartesian morphism in T-Alg,
               (iii) D is an SΓ -algebra and q is an SΓ -morphism (where W has its induced
                     SΓ -structure), and
               (iv) i is a cartesian morphism in S-Alg (where C has its induced S∆ -structure).
              Then there is a TΓ -structure on D such that q is a TΓ -morphism and i is a cartesian
              morphism in T-Alg.
             Proof. It is easy to check that this property is preserved by algebraic pushouts and
             (possibly transfinite) composites of monad morphisms. Thus, it suffices to show that
             monad cells Tf,K → Tf,L have this property. In this case, generalizing the argument
             of Lemma 8.4, we have the following commutative diagram of solid arrows and we
             want to construct a dashed arrow making the other squares commute:
(σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C ⊗ K                                                       f∗ B ∗ D ⊗ K


                                   (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C ⊗ L                                    f∗ B ∗ D ⊗ L


                                                                   C                                          D


(σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ V ⊗ K                                                      f∗ B ∗ W ⊗ K


                                   (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ V ⊗ L                                    f∗ B ∗ W ⊗ L


                                                                   V                                          W
              This is equivalent to solving the following lifting problem:
                           ((σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C ⊗ L) t((σ∗ f )∗ (σ∗ B)∗ C⊗K) (f∗ B ∗ D ⊗ K)   D


                                                    f∗ B ∗ D ⊗ L                               W
              But the left-hand map is now the pushout product of (σ ∗ f )∗ (σ ∗ B)∗ C ⊗ L → f∗ B ∗ D,
              which we showed in Lemma 8.4 to be an acyclic cofibration, and the cofibration
              K → L of simplicial sets; thus it is also an acyclic cofibration.                     
             Theorem 11.13. If T is a cell monad on an excellent model category M , then
             (Mf , Ff ) has weakly stable typal initial T-Alg f -algebras.
             Proof. As usual, for any Γ, let H  Γ be the initial (TΓ + RΓ )-algebra. Then it is a
             fibration and a TΓ -algebra. And given any fibration C  H that is a TΓ -morphism,
             choose an R-structure on it to make C → Γ a (TΓ + RΓ )-algebra and C → H a
             (TΓ + RΓ )-morphism, so that it has a (TΓ + RΓ )-section. Thus, H is a typal initial
             T-Alg f -algebra.
                      SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                               37


   To show that it is weakly stable, by factorization we consider separately the cases
when σ : ∆ → Γ is a fibration or an acyclic cofibration. If σ is a fibration, then
for any T∆ -algebra fibration C  σ ∗ H, by Lemma 11.11 we have a TΓ -algebra
map σ∗ C  σ∗ σ ∗ H, which is a fibration since σ is a fibration. Thus, pulling it
back along the unit H → σ∗ σ ∗ H, we obtain a TΓ -algebra fibration over H, which
therefore has a TΓ -algebra section. This gives a map H → σ∗ C, whose transpose
under the adjunction of Lemma 11.11 is the desired T∆ -algebra section σ ∗ H → C.
   If σ is an acyclic cofibration, then so is its pullback H ∗ (σ) : σ ∗ H → H along the
fibration H  Γ. Since ∆ is fibrant, so is σ ∗ H, and thus H ∗ (σ) has a retraction r.
Now for any T∆ -algebra fibration C  σ ∗ H, let D = r∗ C, so that C ∼    = (H ∗ (σ))∗ (D).
By Lemma 11.12 applied to the relative cell monad Id → T, we can find a TΓ -algebra
structure on D making D → H a TΓ -algebra fibration whose pullback is C → σ ∗ H.
Thus, applying the eliminator for H we get a TΓ -algebra section of D, which pulls
back to a T∆ -algebra section of C.                                                      

   Finally, we also have:

Theorem 11.14. If T is a cell monad on an excellent model category M , then
T-Alg f has representable lifts.

Proof. To make the induction go through, we will prove the following stronger result.
Let S → T be a relative cell monad and let Γ be a fibrant object. For any fibrations
B  A  Γ such that A  Γ is a TΓ -algebra and B  Γ is an SΓ -algebra and
B → A is an SΓ -algebra map, we will show that there is a representing object V for
extensions of the S-algebra structure on B to a T-algebra structure making B → A
into a T-algebra map, and that moreover the map V → Γ is a fibration.
   In particular, this property implies that V is fibrant, as it must be since we are
considering T-Alg f rather than T-Alg. But the stronger assumption that V → Γ is
a fibration ensures that the property is preserved by both algebraic pushouts and
(possibly transfinite) composites of monad morphisms. In the latter case we take a
(possible transfinite) inverse composite of the representing fibrations.
   Thus, it suffices to show that the property holds for monad cells Tf,K → Tf,L .
In other words, we must show that if A  Γ is an (F f ⊗ L)-algebra and B  Γ is
an (F f ⊗ K)-algebra and B → A is a (F f ⊗ K)-algebra map, there is a representing
object for extensions of the (F f ⊗ K)-algebra structure on B to a (F f ⊗ L)-algebra
structure making B → A into a (F f ⊗ L)-algebra map.
   Such an extension is a dotted arrow filling in the following diagram:

                       FΓf (B) ⊗ K                              B


                                            FΓf (B) ⊗ L


                       FΓf (A) ⊗ K                              A


                                            FΓf (A) ⊗ L
38               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


We define the representing object to be the following pullback:
                                           f L
                                              F (B)
               V                            BΓ Γ
                      y                              Γ



                                             K                             f L
                                    F f (B)                                   F (B)
                 Γ                 BΓ Γ            ×    F
                                                            f
                                                                (B)
                                                                      !K     AΓ Γ
                                               Γ       AΓΓ                           Γ
                                                                       Γ


       F f (B)       F f (B)
Here BΓ Γ    and AΓΓ     denote exponentials in M /Γ, while (−)K          L
                                                                 Γ and (−)Γ denote
simplicial powers in M /Γ. Of course, (XΓY )K    ∼    Y ⊗K
                                              Γ = XΓ       , but we have written it
using the former notation to make it clear that the right-hand map is the pullback
                                                                           F f (B)   F f (B)
corner map for the cofibration K → L and the map BΓ Γ           → AΓΓ , which is a
                              f
fibration since B  A and FΓ (B)  Γ are. Hence the right-hand map is a fibration,
and thus so is its pullback on the left.
   The bottom map is determined by the solid arrows in the previous diagram, and
a choice of dotted arrow in the previous diagram would be equivalently a lift of this
         f L
             F (B)
map to BΓ Γ          , and hence also equivalently a section of V  Γ. Moreover, the
                     Γ
entire diagram lives in M /Γ and is preserved by pullback; thus a choice of such a
lift after pullback along σ is the same as a factorization of σ through V . This says
exactly that V has the desired universal property.                                 
Corollary 11.15. If M is an excellent model category and T is a cell monad on it,
then (Mf , Ff ,! ) has strictly stable typal initial T-Alg f -algebras.       
   We refrain from discussing examples until after the generalization to monads
with parameters in the next section.
Remark 11.16. There is a natural generalization of a cell monad that allows cells
generated by endofunctor morphisms F f × K → F f × L for any fibration f and
any cofibration K → L in M , rather than requiring K → L to be a cofibration of
simplicial sets. (This is more general since 1 ⊗ K → 1 ⊗ L is a cofibration in M
for any cofibration K → L of simplicial sets, and X × (1 ⊗ K) ∼  = X ⊗ K.) The
above proofs go through for this generalization as long as the cofibration K → L
satisfies the pushout-product property in M , such as if M is itself a cartesian
monoidal model category. Similarly, we could replace simplicial sets by another
suitable monoidal model category over which M is enriched.

                         12. Cell monads with parameters
   Now we generalize the construction of §11 to allow parameters, i.e. premises for
the formation and introduction rules. Because our type theory has no universes,
we have to treat type parameters separately from term parameters. Intuitively, a
“parameter scheme” is a list of hypothesized judgments in type theory; but in this
section we take a semantic point of view instead.
   Recall that in a comprehension category (C, T ), a dependent projection is a
map that is isomorphic to the comprehension of some (unspecified) type Γ.A → Γ,
and a display map is a finite composite of dependent projections. All pullbacks of
                     SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                            39


dependent projections and display maps exist and are again of the same sort. We
view a display map as a semantic version of a context extension. Let D1 and D be the
categories whose objects are dependent projections and display maps, respectively,
and whose morphisms are pullback squares; then the codomain projections D1 → C
and D → C are fibrations with groupoid fibers.
   Let T=
        ∼ be the subcategory of T containing only the cartesian arrows; then T=
                                                                              ∼ →C
is also a fibration with groupoid fibers. Finally, let D1,∗ be the category whose
objects are dependent projections equipped with a section, and whose morphisms
are cartesian ones commuting with the sections. The forgetful functor D1,∗ → D1 is
a discrete fibration.
Definition 12.1. Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category. We define the set of
parameter schemes over (C, T ) together with, for every such parameter scheme
P, a fibration Inst(P) → C of instantiations of P, mutually inductively as follows.
  • There is an empty parameter scheme , and Inst() = C (i.e. there is a
     unique instantiation of  over every Γ ∈ C).
  • If P is a parameter scheme, an extension of P by a type parameter is a new
     parameter scheme hP, αi determined by a cartesian functor α : Inst(P) → D
     over C. Its instantiations are determined by the following pullback:
                         Inst(hP, αi)                    T∼
                                                          =
                                    y                        cod
                                         α        dom
                           Inst(P)           D           C


                              C
  • If P is a parameter scheme, an extension of P by a term parameter is a new
    parameter scheme JP, α, βK determined by a cartesian functor α : Inst(P) → D
                                                                        α     dom
    over C and a cartesian functor β : Inst(P) → D1 over Inst(P) −
                                                                 → D −−−→ C.
    Its instantiations are determined by the following pullback:
                       Inst(JP, α, βK)                   D1,∗
                                    y
                                             β
                           Inst(P)                        D1
                                         α                       cod
                                                   dom
                              C               D              C
Remark 12.2. The above definition could be made more general; as stated it
essentially assumes that the parameters are defined using only “pseudo-stable
structure”, but we could in principle allow weakly stable structure as well. However,
it is hard to think of examples requiring the more general version, so we refrain
from introducing the complication.
   Intuitively, α assigns the context extension in which a type or term parameter
lives, while β assigns the type to which a term parameter belongs (which can depend
on the context extension). For instance, if a type parameter is just Γ ` B type, then
α will assign to every instantiation over Γ the terminal display map 1Γ . On the
other hand, if the parameter scheme P already contains a type parameter A, then
40               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


the additional type parameter Γ, x : A ` B type will have a functor α that assigns
to each instantiation over Γ the comprehension of the corresponding type A.

Definition 12.3. A fibred category of structures with parameters over a
comprehension category (C, T ) consists of a parameter scheme P, a fibration S → C,
and a faithful amnestic isofibration S → Inst(P) ×C C → over C.

   If Θ is an instantiation of P over Γ, the objects of the fiber over (Θ, X → Γ) will
be called S(Θ)-structures on X; as before they form a partially ordered set.

Definition 12.4. Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category and S a fibred category
of structures with parameters over C. For any instantiation Θ of the parameter
scheme of S over Γ ∈ C, a typal initial S(Θ)-algebra consists of a type H ∈ T (Γ)
and an S(Θ)-structure on Γ.H → Γ, such that for any C ∈ T (Γ.H) together with
an S(Θ)-structure on the composite Γ.H.C → Γ.H → Γ such that Γ.H.C → Γ.H is
an S(Θ)-morphism, there exists a section Γ.H → Γ.H.C of Γ.H.C → Γ.H that is
also an S-morphism.
   We say C has weakly stable typal initial S-algebras if for any Γ and Θ there
exists a typal initial S(Θ)-algebra whose reindexing along any σ : ∆ → Γ is a
typal initial S(Θ[σ], θ[σ])-algebra. If C is split, we say it has strictly stable typal
initial S-algebras if we have an operation assigning to each Γ and Θ a typal initial
S(Θ)-algebra over Γ with specified S-algebra sections, in a way that is strictly
preserved by the split reindexing functors.

Definition 12.5. Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category and S a fibred category
of structures with parameters over C. Given A ∈ T (Γ) and B ∈ T (Γ.A) and an
instantiation Θ of the parameter scheme over Γ, and any S(Θ)-structure A on
Γ.A → Γ, an S-lift of A to B is an S(Θ)-structure on the composite Γ.A.B →
Γ.A → Γ such that Γ.A.B → Γ.A becomes an S(Θ)-morphism over Γ. We say
that S has representable lifts if for any A, B, Θ, A , the functor (C/Γ)op → Set
defined by

                      (σ : ∆ → Γ) 7→ {S-lifts of A [σ] to B[σ]}

is representable. In other words, there exists a map $ : VA ,B → Γ and an S-lift B
of A [$] to B[$], such that for any σ : ∆ → Γ and any S-lift B 0 of A [σ] to B[σ],
there is a unique map τ : ∆ → VA ,B such that $ ◦ τ = σ and B 0 = B[τ ].

   We are almost ready to prove the local universes coherence theorem, but first we
need to address the difference between parameters over C and parameters over C! .
Note that the dependent projections and display maps of C! are exactly the same as
those of C.

Problem 12.6. Every parameter scheme P over (C, T ) gives rise to a parameter
scheme P! over (C, T! ) together with a cartesian functor ρ : Inst(P! ) → Inst(P)
over C.

Construction. By induction on P. Of course, ! = . We define hP, αi! = hP! , α ◦ ρi
and JP, α, βK! = JP! , α ◦ ρ, β ◦ ρK. The well-typedness of the latter for T! is why we
defined β to take values in D1 rather than T=    ∼ . The maps ρ in the two inductive
                      SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                  41


steps are defined by the following diagrams:
             Inst(hP, αi! )                                     (T! )=
                                                                     ∼
                                 ρ


                                        Inst(hP, αi)                            T=
                                                                                 ∼
                                                    y                               cod
                                ρ                       α                dom
                Inst(P! )                 Inst(P)                D              C


                                             C
                                    ρ
            Inst(JP, α, βK! )            Inst(JP, α, βK)                        D1,∗
                                                      y
                                    ρ                              β
                Inst(P! )                    Inst(P)                            D1
                                                            α                        cod
                                                                          dom
                                                 C                   D           C
                                                                                           
Definition 12.7. If S is a fibred category of structures with parameters over C,
with parameter scheme P, we define S! to be the fibred category of structures with
parameter scheme P! over C! obtained by pullback along ρ :
                                S!                          S
                                         y

                                              ρ×1
                       Inst(P! ) ×C C →              Inst(P) ×C C →

Theorem 12.8. Let (C, T ) be a comprehension category and S a fibred category
of structures with parameters over C. If C has weakly stable typal initial S-algebras,
C satisfies (LF), and S has representable lifts, then C! has strictly stable typal initial
S! -algebras.
Proof. Suppose given Γ ∈ C and an instantiation Θ over Γ of the parameter scheme
P! of S! . By induction on P, we construct a local universe VΘ for the formation and
introduction rules (i.e. the type H ∈ T (Γ) and its S(Θ)-structure), an instantiation
Ξ ∈ Inst(P! )VΘ , and a map pΘq : Γ → VΘ such that Θ = Ξ[pΘq].
   In the case of , we take VΘ = 1, and Ξ and pΘq are unique.
   In the case of hP, αi, we have inductively Θ ∈ Inst(P! ) along with VΘ , Ξ, and
pΘq, and also α : Inst(P) → D over C and (as the additional data extending Θ to
a T! -instantiation of hP, αi! ) a type A ∈ T! (dom(α(ρ(Θ)))), determined as usual by
(VA , EA , pAq). Let πA : V(Θ,A) → VΘ be the local exponential
                                 (VΘ × VA → VΘ )α(ρ(Ξ))
in C/VΘ , which exists by (LF). Its comes with a universal evaluation map V(Θ,A) ×VΘ
α(ρ(Ξ)) → VA . But V(Θ,A) ×VΘ α(ρ(Ξ)) is (isomorphic to) the domain of α(ρ(Ξ[πA ])),
so together with VA and EA this evaluation map determines a type in T! over this
domain, which is exactly what we need to extend Ξ[πA ] to an instantiation of hP, αi!
42               PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


over V(Θ,A) . Finally, the universal property of V(Θ,A) says that p(Θ, A)q : Γ → V(Θ,A)
can be determined by a map Γ ×VΘ α(ρ(Ξ)) → VA , but
     Γ ×VΘ α(ρ(Ξ)) ∼
                   = dom(α(ρ(Ξ)))[pΘq] ∼
                                       = dom(α(ρ(Ξ[pΘq]))) ∼
                                                           = dom(α(ρ(Θ)))
so pAq is exactly such a map.
   In the case of JP, α, βK, we have again inductively Θ, VΘ , Ξ, and pΘq, and also
α : Inst(P) → D over C and β : Inst(P) → D1 over dom ◦ α, and (as the additional
data extending Θ to a T! -instantiation of JP, α, βK! ) a section a of β(ρ(Θ)). Let
πa : V(Θ,a) → VΘ to be the dependent exponential
                                  α(ρ(Ξ))∗ (β(ρ(Ξ)))
which exists by (LF). It comes with a universal evaluation map V(Θ,a) ×VΘ α(ρ(Ξ)) →
β(ρ(Ξ)) over dom(α(ρ(Ξ))) = cod(β(ρ(Ξ))), i.e. a section of β(ρ(Ξ))[πa ], which is
exactly what we need to extend Ξ[πa ] to an instantiation of JP, α, βK! over V(Θ,a) .
Finally, the universal property of V(Θ,a) says that p(Θ, a)q : Γ → V(Θ,a) can be
determined by a map α(ρ(Ξ))[pΘq] → β(ρ(Ξ)), but α(ρ(Ξ))[pΘq] ∼        = α(ρ(Ξ[pΘq])) ∼  =
α(ρ(Θ)) and similarly for β(ρ(Ξ)), so a is itself such a map.
    This completes the definition of VΘ , Ξ ∈ Inst(P! )VΘ , and pΘq : Γ → VΘ such that
Θ = Ξ[pΘq]. Now let VH = VΘ and pHq = pΘq, and let EH ∈ T (VH ) be a weakly
stable typal initial S(Ξ)-algebra, with S(Ξ)-structure H . Then (VH , EH , pHq) ∈
T! (Γ) is the specified typal initial S(Θ)-algebra in our intended strictly stable
structure for T! . As usual, this is strictly stable by composition of names.
    For the elimination and computation rules, given C ∈ T! (Γ.H) determined by
(VC , EC , pCq), consider first the object Ve = VH /VC constructed as in [LW15], which
classifies maps σ : ∆ → VH together with maps EH [σ] → VC . In particular, we have
universal maps v : Ve → VH and c : Ve .EH [v] → VC giving EC [c] ∈ T (Ve .EH [v]).
    Now since S has representable lifts, we have a map VH [v],EC [c] → Ve representing
lifts of the S-structure H [v] of EH [v] to EC [c]. Combining universal properties, we
see that maps Γ → VH [v],EC [c] correspond to choices of maps pHq : Γ → VH and
pCq : Γ.EH [pHq] → VC together with a lift of H [pHq] to EC [pCq]. Thus, we can
we take VH [V ],EC [c] as the local universe for the elimination and computation rules.
The weak stability of H implies that the universal lift over VH [V ],EC [c] has a section
that is an S-morphism, which we can then reindex to Γ to obtain a strictly stable
eliminator.                                                                             

   Now we move on to monads with parameters. For any category C with pullbacks
and Γ ∈ C, let Mnd (C)Γ denote the category of fibred monads on C/Γ. A fibred
monad can be restricted along the projection C/∆ → C/Γ for any σ : ∆ → Γ, so
these categories assemble into a fibration Mnd (C) → C.
Definition 12.9. If (C, T ) is a comprehension category with pullbacks, a fibred
monad with parameters on C is a parameter scheme P together with a cartesian
morphism T : Inst(P) → Mnd (C) over C.
   Thus, for any instantiation Θ over Γ, we have an indexed monad T(Θ) on C/Γ,
whose fiber over 1Γ is an ordinary monad T(Θ)Γ on C/Γ. We write T-Alg Θ for the
category of algebras of T(Θ)Γ , each of which has an underlying object of C/Γ, i.e. of
C → over Γ. These categories vary functorially with respect to cartesian morphisms
of Θ (in particular, isomorphisms and reindexing along morphisms in C), so we
                       SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                              43


have a fibration T-Alg → C with a projection T-Alg → Inst(P) ×C C → over C. The
following are easy to verify.
Lemma 12.10. For any fibred monad with parameters T on a comprehension
category C with pullbacks, T-Alg is a fibred category of structures with parameters
over C (with the same parameter scheme).                                         
Lemma 12.11. If T is a fibred monad with parameters on a model category M ,
then the full subcategory T-Alg f of T-Alg consisting of T-algebra structures on
fibrations over fibrant objects is a fibred category of structures with parameters
over Mf .                                                                       
Definition 12.12. If M is an excellent model category, then a (finite) cell monad
with parameters on M is a fibred monad with parameters such that each fibred
monad T(Θ) is a (finite) cell monad on M /Γ.
Theorem 12.13. If T is a cell monad with parameters on an excellent model
category M , then (Mf , Ff ) has weakly stable typal initial T-Alg f -algebras.
Proof. Note that for any σ : ∆ → Γ and any instantiation Θ over Γ, the monad
T(Θ[σ])∆ (the value of the fibred monad T(Θ[σ]) on C/∆ at 1∆ ) coincides with the
monad T(Θ)σ (the value of the fibred monad T(Θ) on C/Γ at σ). This is because
T : Inst(P) → Mnd (C) preserves cartesian arrows, and definition of the reindexing
of a fibred monad and the fact that (C/Γ)/(σ : ∆ → Γ) ≃ C/∆. Therefore, we can
essentially repeat the proof of Theorem 11.13 once for each instantiation.      
Theorem 12.14. If T is a cell monad with parameters on an excellent model
category M , then T-Alg f has representable lifts.
Proof. Inspecting Definitions 11.3 and 12.5, we see that T has representable lifts
just when each fibred monad T(Θ) on C/Γ does. Thus, this follows directly from
Theorem 11.14.                                                                  
Corollary 12.15. If M is an excellent model category and T is a cell monad with
parameters on it, then (Mf , Ff ,! ) has strictly stable typal initial T-Alg f -algebras. 
   The proofs of Theorems 12.13 and 12.14 may seem almost too slick, as if something
is being swept under the rug. In particular, note that in Definition 12.12 we did
not assume any compatibility between the cell structures of the monads T(Θ)!
However, we did assume that the resulting monads fit together into a cartesian
morphism from instantiations to fibred monads, which implies that however the
parameters are being used in the construction of the monads T(Θ) must be stable
under reindexing, and this is all that is required for Theorems 12.13 and 12.14. In
fact, the internals of Inst(P) are only needed to prove the local universes coherence
theorem, Theorem 12.8; for Theorems 12.13 and 12.14, Inst(P) could just as well
be any fibration over C.
   Although Corollary 12.15 is very general, unlike our results in §§6–10 it requires
more work to extract from Corollary 12.15 a statement about models of type theory.
Specifically, in order to apply it to any particular higher inductive type H, we have
to do the following.
   (i) Manually translate the parameters of H to a parameter scheme (Defini-
       tion 12.1). This is practically algorithmic along the lines discussed above: for
       each parameter, α corresponds to the extended context of that parameter, and
44                 PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


       in the case of a term parameter, β corresponds to the type of that parameter.
       It’s just that we don’t have a general theorem that does the work for us.
  (ii) Manually construct a cell monad T (with parameters) from the constructors
       of H. Although it may not be obvious from the examples we have seen so far,
       this is also pretty close to algorithmic, although there are certain limits on
       the constructors we can handle. We will explain in more detail below.
 (iii) Manually generalize the notions of weakly and strictly stable typal initial
       T-Alg f -algebras to refer to stable classes of identity types, dependent identity
       types, and identity applications rather than the simplicial structure of M ,
       and prove an analogue of Theorem 6.9. This is also practically algorithmic:
       transpose the left homotopies to right homotopies, replace the simplicial path
       objects by the type-theoretic structures, and transfer by composing with the
       equivalences h and k from Theorem 6.9.
Ideally, of course, we would like a general correspondence between syntax and
semantics that does all this work for us. This would entail giving a precise syntactic
definition of what a “higher inductive type” is, which is already a significant task.6
We leave it for future work.
    The construction of a cell monad from a list of higher inductive constructors
(item (ii)) goes roughly as follows. Each constructor of H corresponds to a cell of the
monad T. The domain of that constructor, which we require to be “strictly positive”
in H, determines the polynomial functor FWAB in the same way as for ordinary
inductive types. (It may be possible to generalize further, for instance by allowing
identity types of H to appear in such domains, but we ignore that possibility for
now.) The “dimension” of the constructor determines the simplicial cofibration
K → L: ordinary point-constructors use the cofibration ∅ → 1, 1-dimensional path-
constructors use 2 → ∆1 , 2-path constructors use the “inclusion of the boundary
of a 2-globe”, and so on. Finally, in the case of path-constructors, the source and
target of the path determine the “attaching map” of the cell. This is all made
clearer by a discussion of examples.

Example 12.16. Ordinary inductive types are the special case of higher inductive
types that have no path-constructors. In this case, each cell is of the form ∅ → TWAB ,
so instead of a “cell complex” we are really just building a coproduct of the monads
TWAB corresponding to each constructor. In the case of only one constructor, we
just get TWAB itself, as we used in §8.
   An example with two constructors is the natural numbers, for which the con-
structor domains yield the maps ∅ → 1 and 1 → 1 respectively. The former yields
the monad for pointed objects, the latter the monad for objects with an endomor-
phism; thus their algebraic coproduct is the monad for pointed objects with an
endomorphism, the same one we used in §7.

Example 12.17. Any cell complex construction of a simplicial set K using “globular”
cells can be translated into a cell monad for a higher inductive version of K. For



   6The approach of [ACDF16] is promising, but inapplicable as it stands to homotopy type theory,
due to the unsolved problem of defining (∞, 1)-categories and functors internally in type theory.
                           SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                      45


    instance, the circle has a 0-dimensional cell and a 1-dimensional cell:
                   ∅                                  1                               S1
                                              x                                   x

                            ∅            1                        2        ∆1
    If we take simplicial copowers of this diagram with the constant endofunctor at
    1 ∈ M , which is FW1∅ , we get a “cell endofunctor”; and then taking free monads
    we obtain a cell monad. The corresponding higher inductive type is the usual S 1 .
    Similarly, we can construct the sphere S 2 , and so on. In such cases, of course, the
    technology of cell monads is overkill; we can simply take the simplicial copower
    1 ⊗ K and fibrantly replace it, arguing as in §§4–6.
    Example 12.18. More general non-recursive higher inductive types are constructed
    in a similar way with nontrivial endofunctors. For instance, given fi : A → Bi as in
    §§4–6, we have a cell endofunctor
∅                                        F ∅→(B1 +B2 )                                                   F
                                 x                                                              x
                                              [inl◦f1 ,inr◦f2 ]
                   ∅→(B1 +B2 )
      ∅        F                                                      F ∅→A ⊗ 2        F ∅→A ⊗ ∆1
    Note that the endofunctor F ∅→B1 +B2 is constant at B1 + B2 , while F ∅→A ⊗ 2 is
    constant at A ⊗ 2 ∼= A + A. Thus the map marked [inl ◦ f1 , inr ◦ f2 ] really is just such
    a copairing. Taking free monads then yields a cell monad whose higher inductive
    type is the pushout of f1 and f2 .
       This construction applies to a particular A, Bi , fi in some slice M /Γ; in the
    general case we construct a parameter scheme as follows. First there are three type
    parameters for which α : Inst(P) → D is fiberwise constant at 1Γ (i.e. A, B1 , B2
    are all in the same arbitrary context Γ). This yields a parameter scheme P3 whose
    instantiations consist of three types A, B1 , B2 in the same context. Then we have two
    term parameters for which α(A, B1 , B2 ) = (Γ.A → Γ) and for which β(A, B1 , B2 )
    is Γ.A.B1 [A] → Γ.A and Γ.A.B2 [A] → Γ.A respectively. An instantiation of the
    resulting parameter scheme thus consists of three types A, B1 , B2 and morphisms
    A → B1 and A → B2 over Γ.
       We then need to verify that this construction is stable, up to isomorphism, under
    reindexing of these data when performed in arbitrary slices. This is always obvious,
    so subsequently we omit to mention it.
    Example 12.19. The propositional truncation (§10) expressed as a higher inductive
    type has two constructors:
      • tr : A Q
               → kAk
      • treq : x,y:kAk IdkAk (x, y)
    The only parameter is A, so the parameter scheme has one type parameter with α
    fiberwise constant at 1Γ . Again we have a cell monad with two cells, but now it no
    longer arises from a cell endofunctor.
     ∅                                       T1                                                 T2
                                     x                                                     x

               ∅         F ∅→A                              F 2→1 ⊗ 2           F 2→1 ⊗ ∆1
46                  PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


By definition we have F 2→1 (X) = X × X, while it is easy to verify that T1 (X) =
X + A (the free monad on the constant endofunctor at A, whose algebras are objects
under A). The attaching map

                 F 2→1 (X) ⊗ 2 ∼
                               = (X × X) + (X × X) → T0 (X) = X + A

consists of the first and second Qproduct projections, injected into X. This is the
semantic version of the syntax x,y:kAk IdkAk (x, y), which says that we have two
copies of the type being defined in the domain (X × X) and the source and target of
the path (IdkAk (x, y)) come from the first and the second copies respectively. Note
that this map does not land in F ∅→A , only in the free monad it generates.

  In general, when describing the attaching maps of a cell monad it is useful to
know that monad morphisms S → T are equivalent to functors T-Alg → S-Alg
over M , i.e. natural ways to assign an S-algebra structure to any T-algebra. In
particular, if S is algebraically-free on an endofunctor F , then such a morphism is
determined by a natural way to assign an F -endofunctor-algebra structure to any
T-algebra.

Example 12.20. The James construction JA of a type A equipped with a point
? : A, as defined in [Bru16], has three constructors:
     • ε : JA
     • α :QA → JA → JA
     • δ : x:JA IdJA (x, α(?, x))
The parameters are A and ?, so our parameter scheme has one type parameter with
α fiberwise constant at 1Γ , and one term parameter with α again constant at 1Γ
while β(A) = (Γ.A → Γ).
   The first cell is ∅ → F 0→1 , yielding a monad whose algebras are pointed objects.
The second cell is ∅ → F A→A , yielding a monad whose algebras are objects with an
“A-indexed family of endomorphisms” A × X → X.
   The third cell is F 1→1 ⊗ 2 → F 1→1 ⊗ ∆1 . Since F 1→1 (X) = X, an endofunctor-
algebra for F 1→1 ⊗ 2 is an object equipped with two endomorphisms. The nontrivial
attaching map F 1→1 ⊗ 2 → T2 therefore consists of a natural way to assign two
endomorphisms to a pointed object equipped with a map α : A × X → X. The
syntax tells us that first endomorphism is the identity 1X , while the second is
α ◦ (?, 1X ). We leave it to the reader to translate from typal initial algebras to
dependent identity types as in Theorem 6.9.

Example 12.21. Given a type I, two types i : I ` Si type and i : I ` Ti type, and
a family of functions i : I, s : Si ` fi (s) : Ti , corresponding to a map f : S → T in
M /I, an object X ∈ M is internally f -local if the induced precomposition map
(I ∗ X)T → (I ∗ X)S in M /I is an equivalence. The f -localization of a type A can
be defined as a higher inductive type with the following five constructors:
     • loc : A
             Q→ QLf A
     • ext : i:I g:Si →Lf A Ti → Lf A
     • ext0 : i:I g:Si →Lf A Ti → Lf A
              Q Q
             Q Q            Q
     • rtr : i:I g:Si →Lf A s:Si IdLf A (g(s), ext(i, g, fi (s)))
     • rtr0 : i:I h:Ti →Lf A t:Ti IdLf A (h(s), ext0 (i, h ◦ fi , t))
             Q Q            Q
                        SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                  47


The first constructor loc equips Lf A with a map from A, while the other four
ensure that Lf A is internally f -local, being essentially a reorganization of the “bi-
invertibility” definition of equivalence from [Uni13, Chapter 4]: ext and ext0 give two
maps in the opposite direction, while rtr and rtr0 ensure that they are a section and
a retraction of the precomposition map. (In [RSS17] localizations are constructed
instead using pushouts and an auxilary higher inductive type Jf A, which is just
Lf A with ext0 and rtr0 omitted.)
   The parameter scheme for Lf A has one type parameter with α constant at 1Γ ,
two more type parameters with α(I) = (Γ.I → Γ), and one term parameter with
α(I, S, T ) = (Γ.I.S → Γ.I → Γ) and β(I, S, T ) = (Γ.I.S.T [S] → Γ.I.S). The first
                                                                     ∗
cell is ∅ → F ∅→A . The second and third cells are both ∅ → F T S→T , where T ∗ S
denotes the pullback of S → I along T → I. Finally, the fourth and fifth cells are
   ∗                             ∗
F S S→S ⊗ (2 → ∆1 ) and F T T →T ⊗ (2 → ∆1 ), while the attaching maps can be
obtained by interpreting the terms g(s), ext(i, g, fi (s)), h(s), and ext0 (i, h ◦ fi , t) in
the internal extensional type theory of the locally cartesian closed category M .

   Hopefully these examples are convincing of the generality of our construction
and the relative straightforwardness of its application to individual examples. It
does, however, have the following notable limitation: because the “attaching map”
F f,K → Tn must be a map of fibred monads, it must exist before we take the
monad coproduct with R, and therefore in defining it we cannot assume that
Tn (X) is fibrant. Thus, the source and target terms of a higher constructor cannot
use operations that only exist in fibrant types, such as path-concatenation and
eliminators of other inductive types.
   For instance, in the torus constructor sq : IdIdT 2 (base,base) (left  right, right  left),
the source and target terms involve path-concatenation, so we cannot deal with
this constructor directly. Reducing it to a 1-constructor using the “hub-and-spoke”
method [Uni13, §6.7] does not help, since the “rim” of the wheel, and hence the
outer boundaries of the spokes, are defined using the eliminator of S 1 , which is also
only defined when the target is a (fibrant) type.
   However, in this case (and many others) there is a different workaround. As
the cofibration K → L for the monad cell corresponding to sq, we choose the
inclusion ∂(∆1 × ∆1 ) → ∆1 × ∆1 of the boundary of the simplicial square. The
non-fibrant monad T2 generated by the first three constructors does have simplicial
paths left and right, which we can glue together in the appropriate ways to get a
map from ∂(∆1 × ∆1 ). Then our new monad cell glues in a simplicial square with
the appropriate boundary, and when we then fibrantly replace it we can deduce
from this a “globular” 2-cell relating the two boundary composites. We leave the
details to the interested reader.
   In particular, any simplicial set K with finitely many nondegenerate simplices
can be constructed as a finite complex of “simplicial cells” involving the boundary
cofibrations ∂∆n → ∆n . Thus, this method yields a higher inductive type repre-
senting K; although as in Example 12.17 such a simple example can be obtained
more easily as a fibrant replacement of 1 ⊗ K.
   The general workaround applies also to many other examples, but is not universally
applicable. In particular, it does not apply to constructor (4) from §9, which uses
N-induction to define the source and target! However, this problem goes away when
the 1-categorical natural numbers object happens to be fibrant, as in simplicial sets
or sets, since then the natural numbers type is just the natural numbers object and
48                PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


so can eliminate into arbitrary objects. So at least in such cases our construction
does apply to yield the F that is unachievable within ZF.

                                     13. Summary
   Through the course of the paper, we have accumulated a large amount of machin-
ery. For reference, therefore, we give here a self-contained summary of what we have
obtained, and what it yields specifically for the semantics of higher inductive types.
Theorem 13.1. Let M be an excellent model category: that is, simplicial, com-
binatorial, right proper, simplicially locally cartesian closed, and with all monos
cofibrations, and cofibrations stable under limits. Let T be a cell monad with
parameters on M . Then:
   (i) The comprehension category (Mf , Ff ) of fibrant objects of M and fibrations
       of M has weakly stable typal initial T-Alg f -algebras (Theorem 12.13).
  (ii) T-Alg f has representable lifts (Theorem 12.14), and Mf satisfies (LF).
 (iii) Hence by Theorem 12.8, its local universe splitting (Mf , Ff ,! ) has strictly
       stable typal initial T-Alg f -algebras (Corollary 12.15).
  From this general result along with Examples 12.18 to 12.21, and/or by the
warm-up cases treated individually in §§3–8 and 10, we obtain:
Theorem 13.2. Suppose M an excellent model category. Then the comprehension
category (Mf , Ff ) has weakly stable structure, and its local universes splitting
(Mf , Ff ,! ) has strictly stable structure, for the following type formers:
    (i) coproduct types;
   (ii) pushout types;
  (iii) a natural numbers type;
  (iv) W-types;
   (v) propositional truncations;
  (vi) James constructions;
 (vii) localizations;
(viii) a torus type.
   Moreover, we expect cell monads with parameters to suffice for obtaining many
other higher inductive types, under the limitation that the constructors do not
involve “fibrant structure”, i.e. eliminations into the higher inductive type itself.
   Finally, we recall that the “excellent” model categories to which these results
apply include sets and simplicial sets (with their standard model structures); and
more generally all locally presentable locally cartesian closed 1-categories with a
trivial model structure, and all right proper, simplicially locally cartesian closed,
simplicial Cisinski model categories, which suffice to present all locally presentable
locally cartesian closed (∞, 1)-categories, including all Grothendieck (∞, 1)-toposes.

                                      References
[ACDF16] Thorsten Altenkirch, Paolo Capriotti, Gabe Dijkstra, and Fredrik Nordvall Forsberg.
        Quotient inductive-inductive types. CoRR, 2016. arXiv:1612.02346. URL: http://arxiv.
        org/abs/1612.02346. (On pp. 3, 4, 6, and 44)
[AGS15] Steve Awodey, Nicola Gambino, and Kristina Sojakova. Homotopy-initial algebras in
        type theory. Extended abstract in LICS’12, 2015. arXiv:1504.05531. (On p. 5)
[AK16] Thorsten Altenkirch and Ambrus Kaposi. Type theory in type theory using quotient
        inductive types. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 51(1):18–29, 2016. (On pp. 3 and 6)
                         SEMANTICS OF HIGHER INDUCTIVE TYPES                                       49


[AW09] Steve Awodey and Michael A. Warren. Homotopy theoretic models of identity types.
        Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 146(45):45–55, 2009. arXiv:0709.0248. (On p. 2)
[BGL+ 17] Andrej Bauer, Jason Gross, Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine, Michael Shulman, Matthieu
        Sozeau, and Bas Spitters. The HoTT Library: A formalization of homotopy type theory
        in Coq. Certified Programs and Proofs, 2017. arXiv:1610.04591. (On p. 13)
[Bla83] Andreas Blass. Words, free algebras, and coequalizers. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
        117(2):117–160, 1983. URL: http://eudml.org/doc/211359. (On pp. 3, 26, 27, and 28)
[Bru16] Guillaume Brunerie. On the homotopy groups of spheres in homotopy type theory. PhD
        thesis, Université de Nice, 2016. arXiv:1606.05916. (On p. 46)
[Car86] John Cartmell. Generalised algebraic theories and contextual categories. Annals of Pure
        and Applied Logic, 32(0):209 – 243, 1986. (On p. 5)
[CHM18] Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Anders Mörtberg. On higher inductive types
        in cubical type theory. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
        Logic in Computer Science, LICS ’18, pages 255–264, New York, NY, USA, 2018. ACM.
        doi:10.1145/3209108.3209197. (On p. 6)
[Cis02] Denis-Charles Cisinski. Théories homotopiques dans les topos. J. Pure Appl. Algebra,
        174:43–82, 2002. (On p. 7)
[Cis06] Denis-Charles Cisinski. Les préfaisceaux comme modèles type d’homotopie, volume 308
        of Astérisque. Soc. Math. France, 2006. (On p. 7)
[Cis12] Denis-Charles Cisinski. Blog comment on post “The mysterious nature of
        right properness”. http://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2012/05/the_mysterious_
        nature_of_right.html#c041306, May 2012. (On p. 7)
[Cis14] Denis-Charles Cisinski. Univalent universes for elegant models of homotopy types. 2014.
        arXiv:1406.0058. (On p. 6)
[Gar09] Richard Garner. Understanding the small object argument. Appl. Categ. Structures,
        17(3):247–285, 2009. arXiv:0712.0724. (On p. 22)
[Git80] M. Gitik. All uncountable cardinals can be singular. Israel J. Math., 35(1-2):61–88, 1980.
        doi:10.1007/BF02760939. (On p. 28)
[GK17] David Gepner and Joachim Kock. Univalence in locally cartesian closed ∞-categories.
        Forum Math., 29(3):617–652, 2017. arXiv:1208.1749. (On p. 7)
[GT06] Marco Grandis and Walter Tholen. Natural weak factorization systems. Arch. Math.
        (Brno), 42(4):397–408, 2006. (On p. 22)
[HoT13] HoTT Project. The homotopy type theory Agda library. http://github.com/HoTT/HoTT-
        Agda/, 2013. (On p. 13)
[HoT15] HoTT Project. The homotopy type theory Coq library. http://github.com/HoTT/HoTT/,
        2015. (On p. 13)
[HS98] Martin Hofmann and Thomas Streicher. The groupoid interpretation of type theory. In
        Twenty-five years of constructive type theory (Venice, 1995), volume 36 of Oxford Logic
        Guides, pages 83–111. Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1998. (On p. 7)
[Kel74] G. M. Kelly. Doctrinal adjunction. In Category Seminar (Proc. Sem., Sydney, 1972/1973),
        pages 257–280. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 420. Springer, Berlin, 1974. (On p. 35)
[Kel80] G. M. Kelly. A unified treatment of transfinite constructions for free algebras, free monoids,
        colimits, associated sheaves, and so on. Bull. Austral. Math. Soc., 22(1):1–83, 1980. (On
        pp. 22 and 34)
[KL12] Chris Kapulkin and Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine. The simplicial model of univalent founda-
        tions (after Voevodsky). 2012. arXiv:1211.2851. (On pp. 2 and 6)
[Kra16] Nicolai Kraus. Constructions with non-recursive higher inductive types. LICS’16, 2016.
        (On p. 4)
[Lur09] Jacob Lurie. Higher topos theory. Number 170 in Annals of Mathematics Studies. Princeton
        University Press, 2009. arXiv:math.CT/0608040. (On p. 7)
[LW15] Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine and Michael A. Warren. The local universes model: An over-
        looked coherence construction for dependent type theories. ACM Trans. Comput. Logic,
        16(3):23:1–23:31, July 2015. arXiv:1411.1736. (On pp. 3, 5, 8, 9, 11, 15, 16, 17, 21, 24,
        33, and 42)
[nLa]   nLab authors. Transfinite construction of free algebras. https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/
        transfinite+construction+of+free+algebras. (On pp. 22 and 34)
[Rie11] Emily Riehl. Algebraic model structures. New York Journal of Mathematics, 17:173–231,
        2011. arXiv:0910.2733. (On p. 22)
50                PETER LEFANU LUMSDAINE AND MICHAEL SHULMAN


[Rie13]  Emily Riehl. Monoidal algebraic model structures. Journal of Pure and Applied Alge-
         bra, 217(6):1069–1104, 2013. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpaa.2012.09.029. URL:
         http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022404912003052. (On p. 22)
[Rij16] Egbert Rijke. Localization at maps between omega-compact types via a small object argu-
         ment in HoTT. http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/talks/localization-maps-between-
         omega-compact-types-small-object-argument-hott, May 2016. (On p. 4)
[Rij17] Egbert Rijke. The join construction. 2017. arXiv:1701.07538. (On p. 4)
[RSS17] Egbert Rijke, Michael Shulman, and Bas Spitters. Modalities in homotopy type theory.
         arXiv:1706.07526, 2017. (On p. 47)
[Shu14] Michael Shulman. Higher inductive-recursive univalence and type-directed definitions.
         http://homotopytypetheory.org/2014/06/08/hiru-tdd/, June 2014. (On p. 6)
[Shu15a] Michael Shulman. The univalence axiom for elegant Reedy presheaves. Homology, Homo-
         topy, and Applications, 17(2):81–106, 2015. arXiv:1307.6248. (On p. 6)
[Shu15b] Michael Shulman. Univalence for inverse diagrams and homotopy canonicity. Math-
        ematical Structures in Computer Science, 25:1203–1277, 6 2015. arXiv:1203.3253,
         doi:10.1017/S0960129514000565. (On pp. 6 and 8)
[Shu17] Michael Shulman. Univalence for inverse EI diagrams. Homology, Homotopy and Appli-
         cations, 19(2):219–249, 2017. arXiv: 1507.03634. (On p. 6)
[Shu19] Mike Shulman (mathoverflow.net/users/49). Enriched cartesian closed categories. Math-
         Overflow, 2019. URL: http://mathoverflow.net/questions/322085. (On p. 7)
[Str91] Thomas Streicher. Semantics of type theory: correctness, completeness, and independence
         results. Progress in Theoretical Computer Science. Birkhäuser, 1991. (On p. 5)
[Uni13] Univalent Foundations Program. Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Foundations of
         Mathematics. http://homotopytypetheory.org/book/, first edition, 2013. (On pp. 2, 3,
         6, 13, 18, 19, 27, and 47)
[van16] Floris van Doorn. Constructing the propositional truncation using non-recursive HITs.
        Certified Programs and Proofs ’16, 2016. arXiv:1512.02274. (On p. 4)
[vdBM15] Benno van den Berg and Ieke Moerdijk. W-types in homotopy type theory. Mathematical
         Structures in Computer Science, 25:1100–1115, 6 2015. doi:10.1017/S0960129514000516.
        (On p. 24)
