LICS ’18, July 9–12, 2018, Oxford, United Kingdom Robert Atkey
form the types S2, . . . ,Sn and T . This dual usage is illustrated in
the judgement:
n : Nat, x : Fin(n) ⊢ x : Fin(n) (1)
where Nat is the type of natural numbers, and Fin(n) is the type
of numbers less than n. The variables n and x play two different
roles: x is used as a reference to a resource that is transferred from
the input to the output; and n is used to define the type of x. The
fact that n is not used in the computation being described is not
explicitly recorded.
Linear Logic [14] uses presence or absence in a context to explic-
itly record used resources. A linear typing judgement,
x1 : X1, . . . ,xn : Xn ⊢ M : Z
indicates that the term M uses the resources named by the xi each
precisely once.
Linear Logic’s resource accounting via presence conflicts with
type dependency. If a variable’s referenced resources are not used
computationally, it must not appear in the context and so is not
available for use in type formation. Judgement 1 is thus not linear:
both because n is not used in the term, and because it is used twice
in types.
To resolve this conflict, several authors have used formulations of
Linear Logic that distinguish between unrestricted (“intuitionistic”)
variables and restricted (“linear”) variables. For simple types, this
originates in Barber’ work [5], where judgements have two contexts
separated by a vertical bar:
x1 : S1, . . . ,xm : Sm |y1 : X1, . . . ,yn : Xn ⊢ M : Y
The variables xi may be used without restriction, zero, one, or
many times. The variables yi must be used exactly once. Thus,
the judgement tracks information about the two different kinds of
usage. Cervesato and Pfenning [9], and later Krishnaswami et al.
[18] and Vákár [35] adapted this to dependent types. Exploiting
the fact that variables in the unrestricted context act as they do
in normal Type Theory, there is no problem in allowing types to
depend on the variables xi . If we wish to treat elements of Fin(n)
as non-duplicable resources, Judgement 1 can be reformulated as:
n : Nat | x : Fin(n) ⊢ x : Fin(n)
The variables in the unrestricted context now inherit the ambigu-
ous status of variables from standard Type Theory. They can be
used purely contemplatively in types and they can be used for com-
putation. The difference is not recorded in the typing judgement. A
further restriction is that types cannot depend on linear variables.
There is no way that we can contemplate the extensional content
of a linear resource for the purposes of typing, for example:
n : Nat | x : Fin(n) ⊢ (x, refl(x )) : (y : Fin(n)) × (x ≡y)
where we are trying to state that the value we return has the same
extensional content as the input by pairing the computational rep-
resentation of the value with proof of equality.
Systems that rely on split contexts still adhere to Linear Logic’s
discipline of using presence or absence in a context to track how a
variable is used. This restricts what kinds of “use” we can express:
either a variable is used or it is not. To lift this latter restriction,
systems that annotate variables of the context with information
about how they are used have been proposed by Brunel et al. [8],
Ghica and Smith [13], and Petricek et al. [29] (the general idea of
marking variable bindings rather than their types was originally
called “discharged assumptions” by Terui [33]). In all these systems,
information about how variables are used is recorded using a semir-
ing. Semirings are a natural structure to use: addition is used to
sum up multiple uses of a variable, and multiplication is used to
account for nested use. In the notation we will use in this paper, a
judgement in these systems looks like:
x1
ρ1
: S1, . . . ,xn
ρn
: Sn ⊢ M : T (2)
where theρ1, . . . ,ρn are elements of the semiring indicating how
the corresponding variable is used. In these systems, the zero of
the semiring is used to indicate that a variable is not used at all:
x 0: S is a complicated way of stating that x may as well be absent.
However, when we move to dependent types, 0 usage variables
have a useful meaning. McBride [25] reads the usage annotations
ρi as indications of computational usage, so a variable with usage
0 indicates that it has no “run-time” presence, but may still be used
in the formation of types. The properties of semirings means that 0
usage is ideal for tracking use in types: we always have 0 +ρ=ρ,
so combining a computational use with a use in a type retains the
original usage; and 0ρ= 0, so nesting an apparently computational
use within a type treats the whole usage as noncomputational. Thus
McBride’s system incorporates both erasure (see also Miquel [26]
and Mishra-Linger and Sheard [27]) with linearity.
Term typing judgements now have the form:
x1
ρ1
: S1, . . . ,xn
ρn
: Sn ⊢ M σ: T (3)
where the difference from Judgement 2 is that the output is anno-
tated with a usageσ, whereσis restricted to either be the0 or the 1
of the semiring. This annotation means that we can construct terms
that are only to be used in the formation of types. McBride allowed
arbitrary usagesρon the final colon. However, this yields a system
that does not admit substitution as we show in Section 2.3.
We now introduce our formulation of McBride’s system, extend-
ing it with a data type of booleans, and dependent tensor product
types. McBride presented a bidirectional system suited for imple-
mentation, and did not distinguish between proper types and terms
representing types. We are interested in a semantical investigation
of the theory and so switch to a system with an explicit separa-
tion of types and representations of types, and with a “declarative”
presentation of the rules.
2.1.1 Semirings for Usage Accounting
A semiring R is a structure consisting of a carrier set R, binary
operations (+) : R × R → R, (·) : R × R → R and constants 1, 0 ∈ R,
such that (R, +, 0) is a commutative monoid, (R, ·, 1) is a monoid,
(+) and (·) distribute, and 0ρ= ρ0 = 0, for all ρ∈ R. We also
require that the semiring R is positive, meaning that ρ+π= 0
impliesρ= 0 andπ= 0, and has the zero-product property:ρπ= 0
impliesρ= 0 orπ= 0. These latter two properties are required for
the admissibility of substitution.
Suitable semirings include the zero-one-many semiring {0, 1,ω},
whereρ+ω=ωandω·ω=ω; the natural numbers with addition
and multiplication; and the boolean semiring {0, 1}, which we can
read as “erased” and “present”.
2.1.2 Presyntax
Quantitative Type Theory (QTT) is defined over the syntactic cate-
gories of usages,ρ,π, precontexts Γ, pretypes S,T , R, and preterms