                                   Predicativity
                                  Solomon Feferman1

    What is predicativity? While the term suggests that there is a single idea
involved, what the history will show is that there are a number of ideas of
predicativity which may lead to different logical analyses, and I shall uncover
these only gradually. A central question will then be what, if anything, unifies
them. Though early discussions are often muddy on the concepts and their
employment, in a number of important respects they set the stage for the further
developments, and so I shall give them special attention. NB. Ahistorically,
modern logical and set-theoretical notation will be used throughout, as long as
it does not conflict with original intentions.

                 Predicativity emerges: Russell and Poincaré

    To begin with, the terms predicative and non-predicative (later, impredica-
tive) were introduced by Russell (1906) in his struggles dating from 1901 to
carry out the logicist program in the face of the set-theoretical paradoxes. Rus-
sell called a propositional function ϕ(x) predicative if it defines a class, i.e., if the
class {x : ϕ(x)} exists, and non-predicative otherwise. Thus, for example, the
propositional function x 6∈ x figuring in Russell’s paradox is impredicative. Since
the admission of classes defined by arbitrary propositional functions in Frege’s
execution of his logicist program led to its demise as a result of this paradox,
if the program were to be resurrected, it would somehow have to incorporate a
criterion for distinguishing predicative from impredicative ones. Russell’s first
attempts to separate these were highly uncertain, and it was only through the
engagement of Henri Poincaré in the problem starting in his article (1906) that
progress began to be made. Poincaré took several paradoxes as examples to
try to elicit what was common to them, namely the Burali-Forti paradox of
the largest ordinal number, König’s paradox of the least non-definable ordinal
    1 The subject of predicativity is one that has been of great interest to me and has peri-

odically commanded much of my attention over the last forty years. It involves substantial
developments in logic and mathematics and is of significance for the philosophy of mathemat-
ics. However, it is still unsettled how best to assess these various aspects of predicativity. On
March 28, 2002, for a joint meeting of the American Philosophical Association and the Associ-
ation for Symbolic Logic, Jeremy Avigad, Geoffrey Hellman and I participated in a symposium
organized by Paolo Mancosu entitled “Predicativity: Problems and Prospects.” In my lecture
I concentrated on the idea of predicativity in its historical development and particularly its
logical analysis, which has led to new problems of current interest; the present chapter is based
on my text for that lecture. Complementarily, Avigad and Hellman dealt respectively with
questions concerning the mathematical and philosophical significance of predicativity; their
papers are to appear elsewhere. In addition, Mancosu and I are collaborating on a histori-
cally organized survey of predicativity and its relations to mathematical practice which is to
include the material below, for a compendium of the history of mathematical logic under the
editorship of John Dawson, Aki Kanamori and Dirk van Dalen. I greatly appreciate the help
that Paolo Mancosu has given with this chapter, especially the part having to do with early
developments.



                                               1
number, and the Richard paradox defining, by diagonalization, a real number
different from all definable real numbers; it was this last that Poincaré took as
a paradigm. Note that in doing so, Poincaré shifted attention away from pur-
ported definitions of set-theoretical objects involving only purely set-theoretical
notions such as those of class, membership, ordinal number and cardinal num-
ber, to purported definitions of mathematical objects more generally in which
the notion of definability itself was an essential component. In doing so, he
could be considered to be at cross-purposes with Russell. At any rate, Poincaré
came up with two distinct diagnoses of the source of the paradoxes via what
he regarded as “typical” examples. The first was that there is in each case a
vicious circle in the purported definition. For example, in the case of Richard
(1905), since each definition of a real number via its decimal expansion can be
written out using a finite number of symbols, the set D of definable real num-
bers is countable. Then by Cantor’s diagonal construction one can define a real
number r which is distinct from each member of D; but since r is defined, it is
a member of D, which is a contradiction. According to Poincaré, in this case
the vicious circle lies in trying to produce the object r in D by reference to
the supposed totality of objects in D; indirectly, then, r is defined in terms of
itself, as one of the objects in D. Poincaré’s second diagnosis is distinct in its
emphasis, namely that the source of each paradox lies in the assumption of the
“actual” or “completed” infinite. Again with reference to the Richard paradox,
one cannot assume that there is a completed totality of all definable objects of
a certain kind; rather, each one “comes into existence” through a definition in
terms of previously defined objects. As we shall see, in his own mathematics,
Poincaré did not hew to the injunction against the actual infinite. And that is
related to the issue of impredicative definitions as they occur in mathematical
practice to which Poincaré was to return a few years later, and that we’ll also
take up below.

                              Russell’s elaborations
    In his article “Les paradoxes de la logique” (1906a), Russell quickly took
both the vicious circle diagnosis and, to an extent, the objection to the com-
pleted infinite as the point of departure for his further work on predicative vs.
impredicative definitions of classes2 :
      I recognize ... that the clue to the paradoxes is to be found in the
      vicious circle suggestion; I recognize further this element of truth
      in M. Poincaré’s objection to totality, that whatever in any way
      concerns all or any or some of a class must not be itself one of the
      members of a class. (Russell 1973, p. 198)
Russell then went on to make the first of his several attempts to formulate the
VCP (Vicious Circle Principle) in syntactic terms as would be appropriate for
a formalism in which to redevelop logicism, namely:
   2 The quotation is from the English translation in Russell’s Essays in Analysis (1973).

Many of the original texts on the antinomies and predicativity in the period 1906-1912 are
conveniently assembled in Heinzmann (1986).


                                            2
      In M. Peano’s language, the principle I want to advocate may be
      stated: “Whatever involves an apparent variable must not be among
      the possible values of that variable.” (ibid.)
Insofar as this form of the VCP proscribed certain formulas ϕ(x) from defining
classes, its effect would be to exclude from ϕ any bound variables whose in-
tended range includes the class {x : ϕ(x)} as one of its values. But, in addition,
the bound variable ‘x’ of abstraction in {x : ϕ(x)} must not include that class
in its range. These restrictions were then the lead-in to the formalism proposed
in Russell’s article “Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types” (1908),
and on whose plan Principia Mathematica was erected. As is well known, Rus-
sell formulated the VCP in several different ways, and their precise significance
and relation to each other has been the subject of much scrutiny and critique by
a number of scholars, including Kurt Gödel (1944), Charles Chihara (1973) and
Philippe de Rouilhan (1996). The formulation that is tied most closely to Rus-
sell’s theory of types was given in the 1908 article as the following sharpening
of the above:
      [The VCP], in our technical language, becomes: “whatever contains
      an apparent variable must not be a possible value of that variable.”
      Thus [it] must be of a different type from the possible values of
      that variable. Thus we will say that whatever contains an apparent
      variable must be of a different type from the possible values of that
      variable; we will say that it is of a higher type. (Russell 1908, in van
      Heijenoort 1967, p. 163)
Before going into the actual structure of types in Russell’s set up, let me draw
attention to an earlier section of the article, headed All and any (ibid., pp. 156-
159). Here, in contrast to the first quotation from Russell above, a distinction
was made between the use of these two words. Roughly speaking, in logical
terms, the statement that all objects x of a certain kind satisfy a certain condi-
tion ϕ(x) is rendered by the universal quantification (∀x)ϕ(x) in which x now is
a bound variable, while the statement that ϕ(x) holds for any x is expressed by
leaving x as a free variable. In modern terms, the logic of the latter is treated as
a scheme to be coupled with a rule of substitution. The importance of this dis-
tinction for Russell has to do with the injunction against illegitimate totalities.
In particular, with p a variable for propositions, he would admit “p is true or
false, where p is any proposition”, i.e., the scheme p ∨ ¬p, but not the statement
(∀p)(p ∨ ¬p) that “all propositions are true or false” (in both cases using truth
of p to be equivalent to p). Similarly for properties P (x); significantly, Russell
pointed out that the proposed definition of the natural numbers in the form:
‘n is a finite integer’ means “Whatever property ϕ may be, n has the property
ϕ provided ϕ is possessed by 0 and by the successors of possessors” (ibid., p.
159), i.e., in symbols,

               N (n) := (∀ϕ)[ϕ(0) ∧ (∀x)(ϕ(x) → ϕ(x0 )) → ϕ(n)],

cannot be replaced by dropping the universal quantifier over properties ‘(∀ϕ)’.

                                         3
    Though the simplest paradoxes such as Russell’s of the class of all non-self
membered classes or the heterologicality paradox can be construed as involving
arbitrary classes or properties in the form of apparent variables, they do not
involve them in the form of quantified variables. Nevertheless, these considera-
tions led Russell to ban the use of ‘all’ in the form of unrestricted quantification
over propositions and properties, among other things. He then faced the ques-
tion when it is legitimate to apply universal quantification over any given kind of
object, and here he veered away from Poincaré’s injunction against the “actual”
infinite:

      It has often been suggested that what is required in order that it
      may be legitimate to speak of all of a collection is that the collec-
      tion should be finite. Thus “all men are mortal” will be legitimate
      because men form a finite class. But that is not really the reason
      why we can speak of “all men.” What is essential...is not finitude,
      but what may be called logical homogeneity. This property is to be-
      long to any collection whose terms are all contained within the range
      of significance of some one function. It would always be obvious at a
      glance whether a collection possessed this property or not, if it were
      not for the concealed ambiguity in common logical terms such as
      true and false, which gives an appearance of being a single function
      to what is really a conglomeration of many functions with different
      ranges of significance. (ibid., p. 163)

Here a new idea became central:

      ...we can speak of all of a collection when and only when the col-
      lection forms part or the whole of the range of significance of some
      propositional function, the range of significance being defined as the
      collection of those arguments for which the function in question is
      significant, that is, has a value. (ibid., p. 163)

That is, in more modern terms, like all functions in ordinary mathematics,
propositional functions are partial in the sense that they have a prescribed
domain which is given in advance of the function, and outside of which they
are undefined. In particular, the arguments x of a propositional function ϕ
must somehow be “prior” to the function itself. This is achieved by the type
distinction and an ordering of types, which makes the type of x lower than the
type of ϕ. Without further restrictions, this would lead to the formalism of the
simple theory of types. But the VCP in the form given above requires that each
apparent (bound) variable in ϕ also has lower type than ϕ. Together these result
in the formalism of the ramified theory of types. At the bottom are variables of
type 0 ranging over an unspecified non-empty domain of “individuals.” In the
simple theory of types, types can be identified with natural numbers, classes of
individuals are of type 1, classes of classes of individuals of type 2, and so on.
In the ramified theory of types, as e.g., elucidated by Myhill (1974), types are
finite descending sequences t of natural numbers of order or level the first term


                                         4
m1 of t. If ϕ(x) has x of type t and m is least such that m > m1 and all bound
variables of ϕ have order less than m, then ϕ and its extension {x : ϕ(x)} is
of type hmi_ t, and variables of that type are interpreted as ranging over all
such classes. The atomic formulas of this language are of the form x = y where
x, y are of the same type and x ∈ y where x is of a type t and y is of a type
hmi_ t. Russell says that the type of one object is lower, resp. higher, than that
of another if its level is lower, resp. higher.
    If the domain of individuals is finite then under this interpretation for each
type t the domain of objects of type t is finite, and the ramified interpretation
collapses to the simple interpretation. It also follows that if one is to define the
notion of natural numbers in purely logical terms, as would be required by the
logicist program, it must be assumed that the domain of individuals is infinite.
The assumption of this Axiom of Infinity was the first crack in Russell’s attempt
to continue the logicist program within the ramified theory of types. The second
came with the definition of natural number itself in the form, as above:

                N (a) := (∀ϕ)[ϕ(0) ∧ (∀x)(ϕ(x) → ϕ(x0 )) → ϕ(a)]

where 0 is the empty class at a given type t and the successor operation takes
objects of type t to objects of type t, ϕ is of a type hmi_ t, and the variable ‘a’
is also of type t. Here, with natural numbers interpreted as cardinal numbers in
the sense of equivalence classes under the relation of one-one correspondence, t
must be of a type of classes of classes. There were two problems with this. First,
the notion of natural number is relative to any such type t, and second, most
usual proofs of induction can’t be carried out. To show, for example, for any
given natural number a that (∀x)[N (x) → N (a+x)], where + is suitably defined
in cardinal-theoretic terms, one usually has to carry out an induction as follows:
take ψ(x) := [N (x) → N (a + x)], and establish (∀x)ψ(x) by showing ψ(0) ∧
(∀x)(ψ(x) → ψ(x0 )). But ψ is of a higher type (level) than that of the quantified
variable ϕ in the definition of N so we can’t apply that definition to carry out
the required induction. As Russell says, “[it] is obvious that such a state of
things renders elementary mathematics impossible.”(ibid. p. 167). In order to
get around this quite serious obstacle, Russell introduced his “oddly devious”
(in Quine’s words3 ) Axiom of Reducibility. This is formulated in terms of a
notion of predicative function ϕ!x (signaled by the exclamation mark) which
may be described as one in which the bound variables, if any, are all of the same
or lower type than the type of x. (Note that here ‘predicative’ is used in a very
restricted sense.) Using variables f, g, . . . to range over predicative functions,
the Axiom of Reducibility states that any propositional function is coextensive
with some predicative function, schematically:

                                 (∃f )(∀x)[ϕ(x) ↔ f !x]

(ibid., p.171). In particular, that allows one to carry out the blocked induction
above by replacing ψ by an associated predicative function g.
  3 In his introductory note to Russell (1908) in van Heijenoort (1967), p. 151.




                                             5
    Evidently, the Axiom of Reducibility completely vitiates the system of ram-
ified types and makes it equivalent to simple type theory, for which however,
there is no predicative justification if one assumes the Axiom of Infinity. In
the introduction to the second edition of Principia Mathematica, (presumably)
Russell wrote:
     [The Axiom of Reducibility] has a purely pragmatic justification:
     it leads to the required results, and to no others. But clearly it
     is not the sort of axiom with which we can rest content. On this
     subject, however, it cannot be said that a satisfactory solution is as
     yet obtainable. (Whitehead and Russell 1925, p. xiv)
More specifically, at the end of that introduction Russell points out various
places in the development of mathematics on the basis of his formalism where
the Axiom of Reducibility is required, not only to carry out usual inductions
on the natural numbers, as well as their generalizations to transfinite ordinal
numbers, but also in the foundations of the theory of real numbers. In conclusion
he writes:
     It might be possible to sacrifice infinite well-ordered series [i.e., well-
     ordering relations] to logical rigour, but the theory of real numbers
     is an integral part of ordinary mathematics, and can hardly be the
     object of a reasonable doubt. We are therefore justified in supposing
     that some logical axiom which is true will justify it. The axiom
     required may be more restricted than the axiom of reducibility, but,
     if so, it remains to be discovered. (ibid., p. xlv)


             Poincaré vs. the logicists and the Cantorians:
                       from paradoxes to practice

    In view of the lack of justification for the Axiom of Infinity and the Axiom
of Reducibility one must count as a failure Russell’s attempt at a purely logical
predicative foundation of mathematics beginning with the definition of the nat-
ural numbers. But even if it had been successful, it would have done nothing
for Poincaré. In his excellent article, “Poincaré against the logicists,” Warren
Goldfarb writes:
     Although the great French mathematician Henri Poincaré wrote on
     topics in the philosophy of mathematics from as early as 1893, he
     did not come to consider the subject of modern logic until 1905.
     The attitude he then expressed toward the new logic was one of
     hostility. He ... dismissed as specious both the tools devised by
     the early logicians and the foundational programs they urged. His
     attack was broad: Cantor, Peano, Russell, Zermelo, and Hilbert
     all figure among its objects. Indeed, his first writing on the sub-
     ject is extremely polemical and is laced with ridicule and deroga-
     tion. Poincaré’s tone subsequently became more reasonable but his

                                         6
      opposition to logic and its foundational claims remained constant.
      (Goldfarb 1988, p. 61)
In this article Goldfarb on the whole legitimately critiques various of Poincaré’s
objections to the indicated foundational programs, but the nature of those ob-
jections is relevant to a fundamental shift in the further development of the
idea(s) of predicativity and its relation to mathematical practice, so we shall
review them here. First, as Goldfarb explains, Poincaré’s attack on the new
logicians begins

      ...with the avowed aim of showing that [they] have not eliminated
      the need for intuition in mathematics. By showing this, he says, he
      is vindicating Kant... This avowal is misleading, for in Poincaré’s
      hands the notion of intuition has little in common with the Kantian
      one. ... [Rather], for Poincaré, to assert that a mathematical truth
      is given to us by intuition amounts to nothing more than that we
      recognize its truth and do not need, or do not feel the need, to argue
      for it. Intuition, in this sense, is a psychological term; it might just
      as well be called “immediate conviction.” (ibid., p. 63)
In particular, for Poincaré the structure of natural numbers and the associated
principle of induction are given in intuition and do not require a foundation;
indeed, in his view, they are presupposed in any attempt at such a founda-
tion. In the case of the logicist program, this is seen in the very description
of the axiomatic system, with its inductive generation of formulas and proofs;
hence that enterprise assertedly involves a petitio principi. Goldfarb argues that
Poincaré is mistaken in ascribing a petitio in this case, as he is in other cases.
In a useful review of Goldfarb’s article, Michael Hallett (1990) defends Poincaré
on this point, at least in part. What is important for us here is not which side
is correct, but the content and influence of Poincaré’s views.
    Poincaré’s objections to the Cantorians rests on their essential use of im-
predicative constructions violating the VCP. Curiously, he accepted the Axiom
of Choice on the grounds that it “is a synthetic judgment a priori [note the
Kantian terminology]; without it the theory of cardinals would be impossible,
for finite numbers as well as for infinite ones.”4 But he criticized Zermelo’s 1904
proof—from the Axiom of Choice—that every set can be well-ordered, at a point
that made use of the very common set-theoretical operation of the union U of
a set S of sets X, U = {x : (∃X)(X ∈ S ∧ x ∈ X)}, on the grounds that what
members U has depends on which sets belong to S and what their members
are. In particular, it depends on whether U belongs to S and what its members
are; thus, Poincaré identified the operation of union as illegitimately impredica-
tive. In his response to this criticism, Zermelo (1908, in van Heijenoort 1967
pp. 190-191) pointed out that “proofs that have this logical form are by no
means confined to set theory; exactly the same kind can be found in analysis
wherever the maximum or the minimum of a previously defined ‘completed’ set
  4 Poincaré (1906), p. 313.




                                         7
of numbers ... is used for further inferences. This happens, for example, in the
well-known Cauchy proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra, and up to now
it has not occurred to anyone to regard this as something illogical.” The par-
ticular proof cited by Zermelo proceeds by forming the minimum of the set of
values of |p(x)| where p is a polynomial over the complex numbers. Relatedly, if
f (x) is a continuous function on a closed interval [a, b] in the real numbers, then
f has a minimum value (as well, of course, a maximum value) in that interval.
This seems to appeal to the general principle of greatest lower bound (g.l.b.) for
the real numbers R, i.e., that any bounded subset S of R has a g.l.b. (as well
as a least upper bound, l.u.b.). The existence of the g.l.b. can be recognized
set-theoretically as the formation of a union in terms of the association of real
numbers x with their upper Dedekind sections Dx in the rational numbers Q,
where
                             Dx = {r : r ∈ Q ∧ x < r}.
Let S ∗ = {Dx : x ∈ S}. Then the union U of the sets in S ∗ is the Dedekind
section Dm where m = g.l.b.(S); in this one invokes the Dedekind completeness
(or continuity) of R, according to which every Dedekind section determines a
real number. Dually, the l.u.b.(S) is determined by the intersection of all the
sets in S ∗ . (If one uses lower Dedekind sections, these operations are reversed.)
    Poincaré responded to Zermelo’s specific example by asserting that the min-
imum of |p(x)| is equally described as the minimum of {|p(x)| : x is rational}.
More generally, for any continuous function f (x) on a compact set S in the real
or complex numbers its minimum is the same as the minimum of the countable
set {f (x) : x ∈ S ∧ x is rational}, and that does not require an impredicative
step. Poincaré was correct in this response, though his argument was faulty.
Simply, any bounded set S of rational numbers has a g.l.b. (and l.u.b.) by
selecting a subsequence that converges to the same. In this case, one invokes
Cauchy completeness of R for which, in contrast to Dedekind completeness,
there is a predicative argument as will be explained below.
    Though Poincaré rejected the actual infinite in his polemical writings (e.g.,
“There is no actual infinite; the Cantorians forgot that, and they fell into
contradiction.”–1906, p.316), his acceptance of the structure of natural num-
bers and of the principle of induction on it coupled with the implicit use of
classical logic and its assumption of the law of excluded middle at least takes
quantification over the natural numbers to be definite, and that is a form of
acceptance of the actual infinite. No doubt Poincaré assumed this and much
more in his mathematical practice in analysis and topology, though he might
have said that he could always account for his work predicatively by more care-
ful considerations of the sort given in his response to Zermelo. There could be
some historical interest in putting Poincaré’s “philosophical” principles (to the
extent that they can be made precise) up against the details of his practice, but
that is neither here nor there for our present survey. What counts is what influ-
ence those principles had on the development of predicativity, not whether he
abided by them himself. And what is most significant about Poincaré’s dispute
with Zermelo in 1906-1909 is that attention was shifted away from the role of

                                         8
purportedly circular definitions in the production of the paradoxes to their role
at the very center of mathematical practice, namely in the l.u.b. principle for
the real numbers.
    The other aspect of Poincaré’s dispute with Cantorians lies in their extension
of the actual infinite to the transfinite. Of course he was not alone in this.
Other prominent critics were Leopold Kronecker in the 19th century and L.
E. J. Brouwer in the 20th century; but both were more radical than Poincaré
in rejecting it also at the level of the natural numbers. In Brouwer’s case it
lay in the identification of the law of excluded middle as the culprit in the
Cantorian crimes, in its supposedly illegitimate employment when applied to
infinite totalities. Since, as I have argued, Poincaré did not go that far, he can
be considered to be laying out a middle ground between the constructivists and
the set-theoretical platonists: namely, it is the position of being a realist with
respect to the natural numbers and a definitionist in all else.

               Weyl’s predicative development of analysis

    Hermann Weyl was the first to give substance to this middle ground, in his
famous 1918 monograph Das Kontinuum. An exegesis of that work is contained
in the article “Weyl vindicated” (Feferman 1988) and its significance has been
discussed in several other articles reprinted in my collection, In the Light of Logic
(1998). There is thus no need to go over those here at any length. Rather, for
the present purposes, a relatively brief summary is sufficient, and that is most
simply accomplished by quoting from myself:

      In the introduction to [Das Kontinuum] Weyl criticized axiomatic
      set theory as a “house built on sand” (though the objects of, and
      reasons for, his criticism are not made explicit.) He proposed to
      replace this with a solid foundation, but not for all that had come to
      be accepted from set theory; the rest he gave up willingly, not seeing
      any other alternative. Weyl’s main aim in this work was to secure
      mathematical analysis through a theory of the real number system
      (the continuum) that would make no basic assumptions beyond that
      of the structure of natural numbers N. ...Weyl did not attempt to
      reduce...reasoning about N to something supposedly more basic. In
      this respect Weyl agreed with Henri Poincaré that the natural num-
      ber system and the associated principle of induction constitute an
      irreducible minimum of theoretical mathematics, and any effort to
      “justify” that would implicitly involve its assumption elsewhere... .
      ...unlike Brouwer,Weyl accepted uncritically the use of classical logic
      at this stage (though at a later date he was to champion Brouwer’s
      views). (op. cit., pp. 51ff)
In Weyl’s redevelopment of analysis, the rational numbers are reduced to the
natural numbers in a standard way going back to Kronecker. But to do analysis,
one needs representations of real numbers either as sets or sequences of rational

                                         9
numbers, and that reduces to the question of what sets or sequences of natural
numbers may be asserted to exist. Having accepted the natural number system
with its basic inductively defined operations such as addition and multiplication,
Weyl accepted that each subset of N of the form {n ∈ N : A(n)} exists, where
A is an arithmetical formula, i.e., one that contains no quantifiers ranging over
sets, only over natural numbers. Beyond those, what other kinds of sets may
be asserted to exist on predicative grounds? Adapting ramified type theory
to this specific second-order context, one could consider sets of level 1, 2, 3
and so on, where the sets of level 1 are the arithmetically definable ones, those
of level 2 are defined by formulas in which all second order quantifiers range
over sets of level 1, those of level 3 allow second order quantifiers only over
sets of level 1 or sets of level 2, and so on. Carrying this over to analysis,
one would correspondingly then have real numbers of different levels 1, 2, 3,
... . But if S is a bounded set of real numbers of some level k, its g.l.b. and
l.u.b. are defined by applying the operations of union, resp. intersection to
corresponding sets S ∗ of upper Dedekind sections of the rational numbers, and
that requires quantification over sets of level k. Thus the g.l.b., resp., l.u.b. of
S would be of level k + 1. Weyl concluded that a development of analysis in
such ramified terms would be unworkable; at the same time, he rejected the
Axiom of Reducibility as untenable on predicative grounds. His solution was
to confine himself to arithmetical sets of natural numbers and the associated
sets and sequences of rational numbers. With real numbers identified not as
Dedekind sections but rather as Cauchy (or fundamental) sequences hrn in∈N of
rational numbers, sequences of real numbers can be treated as double- sequences
rk,n of rational numbers. Then one can show that if s = hxk ik∈N is a Cauchy
sequence of real numbers given as xk = hrk,n in∈N , then its limit t = hqn in∈N
exists arithmetically definable from the double-sequence hrk,n ik,n∈N . Thus, in
this form, the Cauchy completeness of the real number system is justified by
the arithmetical comprehension axiom.
    With the real number system secured in this way, Weyl could move on to see
which parts of analysis could be redeveloped in this restricted version of predica-
tivity, given the natural numbers, which one might call arithmetical analysis.5
His main achievement was to show that substantially all of 19th century analysis
of piece-wise continuous functions could be accounted for in this way, since any
continuous function f of real numbers is completely determined by its behavior
at rational arguments, and hence can be represented at the second-order level.
Subsequent research beginning in the 1970s has been able to extend Weyl’s
program much farther into 20th century analysis; some more details about the
reach of that will be indicated below. What is important for this part of our
story is not that Weyl brought forth a new idea about predicativity, but rather
that he showed the exceptional viability mathematically of the restricted part
of predicativity, given the natural numbers, based without ramification on the
second-order arithmetical comprehension axiom.

   5 The first formulation of arithmetical analysis in modern logical terms was given by Grze-

gorczyck (1955).


                                             10
                        Predicativity sidelined: 1920-1950

    If predicativity was to progress following these early developments it would
need a leader and practitioners. As it turned out, neither were there, for a
number of reasons. Its first champion, Poincaré, died in 1912, and in any case
he had not engaged in the essential clarification or implementation of his ideas.
As for Russell, predicative logicism in the form of ramified type theory was
compromised by the Axiom of Reducibility. Then, following the exhausting
task of producing the first edition of Principia Mathematica (1910-1913), Rus-
sell turned to general problems in philosophy from an analytic perspective, and
during World War I was drawn aside into pacifist politics. Finally, Wittgen-
stein’s critiques of Russell’s logic and philosophy struck serious blows to his
confidence in his ideas.
    The case of Weyl is different: despite the relative success of his arithmetically
predicativist program in Das Kontinuum, he fell under the spell of Brouwer
as he became more familiar with the work of that crusading intuitionist. In
1921 he wrote, “I now abandon my own attempt and join Brouwer.”6 He then
engaged in contributing to intuitionistic ideas and their relation to practice,
and championed these in the following years, but eventually he became rather
pessimistic about its prospects. Years later he wrote:
      Mathematics with Brouwer gains its highest intuitive clarity. He
      succeeds in developing the beginnings of analysis in a natural man-
      ner, all the time preserving the contact with intuition much more
      closely than had been done before. It cannot be denied, however,
      that in advancing to higher and more general theories, the inapplica-
      bility of the simple laws of classical logic eventually results in almost
      unbearable awkwardness. (Weyl 1949, p. 54)
    The foundational program most prominently in competition with that of
Brouwer was Hilbert’s proof-theoretical consistency program. By restricting to
finitist methods, that was more radical than Brouwer’s, but it was much more
ambitious in its aim to “secure” the practice of non-constructive mathematics
via consistency proofs of appropriate formal systems. Though that was dashed
by Gödel’s theorem on unprovability of consistency in 1931, the program took
on new life with Gentzen’s consistency proof for arithmetic and was transformed
by the employment of limited transfinite methods.
    What really pushed predicativity to the sidelines, however, was the success
of axiomatic set theory—as developed by Zermelo, Skolem and Fraenkel—in
allaying fears about the paradoxes. Though not demonstrably consistent, in-
tensive development of the subject without running into any difficulties gave
comfort and confidence to its practitioners and gradually won the support of
mathematicians at large. Nor did the impredicativity that Poincaré and Weyl
had located in the l.u.b. principle in the real numbers generate any concern.
  6 Weyl’s intuitionistic excursion is fully described and exemplified with relevant articles in

Part II of Mancosu (1998); cf. p. 98 op. cit. for the 1921 quote.


                                              11
For, in mathematical practice the real numbers are regarded as a definite com-
pleted totality independent of human constructions and definitions, not some
vague collection of numbers “growing” under successive definitions. Then the
l.u.b. of a bounded subset S of R merely serves to single out a specific element
of R, not to “bring it into existence.” In this respect, it is like the least number
operator in the set of natural numbers, which serves to single out a specific
number in N without our always being able to say which one it is in ordinary
systems of representation. (For example, in the solution of Waring’s problem,
given k, there is a least n such that every natural number is a sum of at most
n k th powers; for all but the first few k, the specific value of n is unknown.)
Mathematicians were thus insensitive to impredicativity in practice.

   A story here, recounted in my book, is apropos:
      ...a famous wager was made in Zürich in 1918 between Weyl and
      George Pólya, concerning the future status of the following two
      propositions: (1) Each bounded set of real numbers has a precise
      upper bound. (2) Each infinite subset of real numbers has a count-
      able subset. [The latter requires the Axiom of Choice.] Weyl pre-
      dicted that within twenty years either Pólya himself or a majority of
      leading mathematicians would admit that the concepts of number,
      set and countability involved in (1) and (2) are completely vague,
      and that it is no use asking whether these propositions are true or
      false, though any reasonably clear interpretation would make them
      false... . the loser was to publish the conditions of the bet and the
      fact that he lost in the Jahresberichten der Deutschen Mathematiker
      Vereinigung... (Feferman 1998, p. 57)

    The wager was never settled as such, for obvious political reasons. Accord-
ing to Pólya (1972), “The outcome of the bet became a subject of discussion
between Weyl and me a few years after the final date, around the end of 1940.
Weyl thought he was 49% right and I, 51%; but he also asked me to waive the
consequences specified in the bet, and I gladly agreed.” Pólya showed the wager
to many friends and colleagues, and, with one exception, all thought he had
won.
    In axiomatic Zermelo-Fraenkel (ZF) set theory, the fundamental source of
impredicativity is in the Separation Axiom scheme, which asserts for each well-
formed formula ϕ(x) (possibly with parameters) of the language of ZF the
existence of the set {x : x ∈ a ∧ ϕ(x)} for any set a. Since the formula ϕ
may contain quantifiers ranging over the supposed “totality” of all sets, this is
impredicative according to the VCP. Mathematically, this prima facie impred-
icativity is given teeth by the assumption of the Axiom of Infinity, guaranteeing
the existence of the set ω of finite ordinals (or the natural numbers) and by the
assumption of the Power Set Axiom, guaranteeing for any set a the existence
of P (a) = {x : x ⊆ a}. Without the Axiom of Infinity, the impredicativity of
Separation becomes innocuous, since the system has a model in the hereditarily


                                        12
finite sets. With the Axiom of Infinity, the axioms of Power Set and Separation
lead, among other things to the existence of the real number system, repre-
sented e.g. as the set of all upper Dedekind sections in the rational numbers,
and thence to the l.u.b. principle for arbitrary bounded sets of real numbers.
    Though predicativity went into hibernation until the 1950s, one important
technical development in axiomatic set theory would prove to be significant for
it. This was Gödel’s model of the constructible sets (1939). The “standard
interpretation” of ZF set theory, due to Zermelo in 1930, is in the cumulative
hierarchy hVa ia∈On , defined by transfinite recursion on the class On of (finite
and transfinite) ordinal numbers α by transfinite iteration of the power set
operation P starting with the empty set ∅ as follows:
                                                            [
              V0 = ∅, Vα+1 = P (Vα ), and for limit α, Vα =     Vβ .
                                                                β<α

This is a cumulative theory of types, unlike simple type theory, since as may be
shown by induction on α, if β < α then Vβ ⊆ Vα . Gödel defined the constructible
hierarchy hLα iα∈On by modifying the successor step, replacing the power set
operation by an operation PDef (a) which, for any set a, consists of all sets of the
form {x : x ∈ a ∧ ϕa (x)} where the superscript ‘a’ indicates that all quantifiers
in ϕ are restricted to range over a, and where all parameters in ϕ are elements
of a. Then Lα is defined recursively by:
                                                               [
            L0 = ∅, Lα+1 = PDef (Lα ), and for limit α, Lα =       Lβ .
                                                                 β<α

The constructible hierarchy thus stands to the cumulative hierarchy as Russell’s
ramified theory of types stands to the simple theory of types. In fact, the con-
structible hierarchy may be considered to be entirely predicative except perhaps
in its free use of arbitrary ordinals. Since ordinals are the order types of well-
ordered sets and those are defined impredicatively by the condition that any
non-empty subset has a least element, the constructible hierarchy is not on the
face of it predicative. But it may be considered to be predicative in a modified
sense, relative to the notion of arbitrary well-ordering or ordinal number.
    An interesting restriction of the notion of constructibility is the L hierarchy
taken up to the least uncountable ordinal ω1 , that comes into the next part
of our story. There and in the four succeeding sections7 , somewhat technical
notions are involved, and for the sake of brevity, it must be assumed that the
reader is familiar with the basic concepts involved. Otherwise, the sections can
be skimmed.

    Predicativity in transition, as a chapter of definability theory

    The logical analysis of predicativity reemerged in the 1950s as a chapter
in the extension of recursion theory to various “higher” definability notions,
  7 Through “The outer mathematical bounds of predicativity.”




                                          13
especially for sets of natural numbers. A systematic study of hierarchies of
definitions of sets of natural numbers was undertaken in the early 1950s by
Kleene and, independently, Davis and Mostowski. In Kleene’s hands, this took
the following form, using the “Turing jump” operator which takes one from any
set X to a set X 0 which is universal for sets that are Σ01 in X. The sets which
are obtained from N by finite iteration of the jump operation are, up to relative
recursiveness, all the arithmetically definable sets. These thus take for granted
the definiteness of quantification over N , and in that sense N as a completed
totality. Kleene (1955) defined a transfinite extension of this hierarchy, using
the set O of Church-Kleene notations for constructive ordinals. For a ∈ O, we
write |a| for the ordinal α denoted by a. As an analogue of the least uncountable
ordinal ω1 , the least ordinal not constructive in the sense of Church-Kleene (i.e.,
the least α such that there is no a ∈ O with |a| = α), is denoted ω1CK . It was
shown by Spector (1955) that the order types of recursive well-orderings of N
are exactly the ordinals less than ω1CK . Kleene’s extension of the finite jump
hierarchy, and thence of the arithmetical sets, is defined inductively for each
a ∈ O yielding a subset Ha of N , as follows. H0 = ∅ and the step from Ha to
its successor set is by the jump operation; finally, at a limit notation, one takes
the direct sum of the sets associated with the recursive sequence approaching it.
Then a set is called hyperarithmetic if it is recursive in Ha for some a ∈ O. The
collection of all such sets is denoted HY P , which properly extends the class of
arithmetical sets. One of the main results of Kleene (1955) is that
                                   HY P = ∆11 ,
i.e., the collection of sets definable both in Π11 form {n : (∀X)A(n, X)} and in
Σ11 form {n : (∃X)B(n, X)} for A, B arithmetical.
     The connection with predicative definitions in the sense of the ramified an-
alytic hierarchy was established as follows. The basic step in that hierarchy
consists in passing from a collection D of subsets of N to a new collection D∗
by putting a set S in D∗ just in case there is a formula ϕ(x) of second-order
arithmetic such that for all n,
                                n ∈ S ↔ (ϕ(n))D ,
where the superscript ‘D’ indicates that all second-order quantifiers in ϕ are
relativized to range over D. Then we can define the collections Rα for arbitrary
ordinals α by
                                                            [
              R0 = ∅, Rα+1 = (Rα )∗ , and for limit α, Rα =     Rβ .
                                                              β<α

Thus the definition of the Rα proceeds exactly like the Lα in Gödel’s con-
structible hierarchy, except that at each stage one is confined to collections of
subsets of N . Though Rα is defined for all α, it is not hard to show that we
get nothing new for uncountable α, in fact there is a countable α such that
Rα = Rα+1 . Kleene (1959) proved that
                                 HY P = Rω1CK .

                                        14
However, HY P does not exhaust the ramified hierarchy, as follows from results
of Gandy (1960) and Spector (1960).
    It was tentatively proposed by Kreisel (1960) to identify the predicatively
definable sets, given the natural numbers, with the members of HY P , essentially
for the following reasons. Call an ordinal α predicative(ly definable) if it is the
order type of a predicatively definable well-ordering ≺ of the natural numbers;
then a set should be considered to be predicatively definable if it belongs to Rα
for some predicative α. Clearly, then, on those grounds all recursive ordinals are
predicative, and so by Kleene’s equation above, each member of HY P ought
to be accepted as predicative. For the converse, the predicative ordinals should
only be taken to be those generated by the following “boot-strap” condition: if
α is a predicative ordinal and ≺ is a well-ordering relation in Rα and if β is the
order-type of ≺, then β is predicative. But then the predicative ordinals do not
go beyond the recursive ordinals, using the result of Spector (1955) that every
hyperarithmetic well-ordering has order type less than ω1CK : for if α is recursive
and the well-ordering ≺ is in Rα then it is hyperarithmetic, and hence its order-
type β is recursive. This part of the argument shows that the predicative sets
do not go beyond HY P .
    Actually, analogous considerations leading to this identification had been
proposed somewhat earlier by Wang (1954), who introduced ramified formal
systems Σα which have as a natural model the constructible sets to level ω + α
(since Wang starts with the hereditarily finite sets). The ordinals regarded to be
predicative are again generated by a “boot-strap” condition: if α is predicative
and β is defined by a well-ordering relation expressed in Σα then β is predicative.
The system Σ is taken to be the union of the Σα for α predicative. Spector (1957)
established that the predicative ordinals in this sense are exactly those less than
ω1CK and the sets of natural numbers definable in Σ are exactly the HY P sets.
In a suitable sense, the sets definable in Σ are those which have HY P structure
on their transitive closure.8
    Though the considerations leading to the identification of the predicative
ordinals, resp. sets of natural numbers, with the recursive ordinals, resp. hy-
perarithmetic sets, have a certain plausibility, they ignored one crucial point if
predicativity is only to take the natural numbers for granted as a completed
totality, namely that they involve in an essential way (both from above and
below) the impredicative notion of being a well-ordering relation. A step away
from that would be to talk of predicatively provable well-orderings in a way to
be explained next.

                      Predicative provability in the 1960s

   The idea, to begin with, is that instead of dealing with the collections Rα ,
one deals (as in the systems Σα ) with a transfinite progression of formal systems
   8 Independently of Wang, Lorenzen (1955) dealt with systems S of a character similar to
                                                                   α
the Σα but did not impose precise conditions on the ordinals to be admitted. Lorenzen’s main
concern there is with what parts of mathematics can be developed predicatively.


                                            15
of ramified analysis RAα , using variables X β , Y β , Z β , . . . for each β ≤ α. Here
ordinals are not to be considered set-theoretically but rather as notations chosen
from O by some natural procedure. The formal systems RAα incorporate as
axioms comprehension principles expressing closure under the appropriate ram-
ified definitions. These can only provide closure conditions on the sets at each
level; the minimal model of RAα is given by hRβ iβ≤α , but larger collections can
also satisfy the axioms of RAα . In particular, we can interpret the variables
X 0 , Y 0 , Z 0 , . . . as satisfying the closure conditions of any larger Rβ .
    The crucial new point (compared to Wang’s systems) is that the predicative
ordinals are those that cannot only be defined by (what happen to be) well-
ordering relations in the given systems but must also be proved previously to
be such relations. The problem is how to meet this requirement without un-
restricted second-order quantification; the answer comes from the provability
condition as follows. Given ≺ a binary recursive relation in the natural num-
bers, let W Oβ (≺) express that ≺ is a linear ordering such that every non-empty
subset X β of its field has a ≺-least element. Then if one proves W O0 (≺), it
follows that one can “lift” the proof to establish W Oβ (≺) for each β that comes
to be accepted. In this sense, the proof of the predicatively meaningful state-
ment W O0 (≺) can insure all predicatively meaningful consequences W Oβ (≺)
of the impredicative statement of well-ordering W O(≺); indeed, from the out-
side it insures that ≺ is a well-ordering. Now Kreisel’s proposal (1958) can be
formulated as follows. The predicative(ly provable) ordinals are generated from
0 by the boot-strap or autonomy condition: if α is predicative and RAα proves
W O0 (≺) for a given recursive ≺, and β is the order type of ≺ then β is pred-
icative. The least non-predicatively provable ordinal is then proposed to be the
least ordinal which cannot be obtained in that way.
    Kreisel called for an independent characterization of the limit of the pred-
icatively provable ordinals in the sense just described. That problem was solved
independently by Schütte (1965, 1965a) and me (“Systems of predicative anal-
ysis,” 1964), in terms of the Veblen hierarchy hχα iα of critical functions of
ordinals defined for each ordinal α by: χ0 (ξ) = ω ξ and when α 6= 0, χα enu-
merates in order of size the set of common fixed points ξ of all χβ for each
β < α, i.e., {ξ : for all β < α, χβ (ξ) = ξ}. Then the function of ξ given by χξ (0)
is normal; let Γα be the αth fixed point ξ of the equation χξ (0) = ξ. Then what
Schütte and I showed is that the least non-predicatively provable ordinal is Γ0 .
Outlines of proofs are to be found in the cited references. A full exposition can
be found in Schütte’s book Proof Theory (1977), Ch. VIII.

                       Predicatively justifiable systems

   Taking the intrinsic interest of predicativity given the natural numbers for
granted, after determining Γ0 to be the least non-predicatively provable ordinal
according to the preceding proposal, one had to return to the question of how
much mathematics could be developed predicatively. This was pursued both
theoretically, via alternative formal systems, and by means of case studies, to


                                          16
be discussed below. On the theoretical side, since (as Weyl stressed) ramified
theories are unsuitable as a framework for the development of analysis, the first
question was to see which unramified systems could be justified on predica-
tive grounds. A formal system T is said to be predicatively justifiable if it is
proof-theoretically reducible to one of the systems RAα for α < Γ0 and locally
predicatively justifiable if it is proof-theoretically reducible to the union of all
these systems.9 If T has the same proof-theoretic strength as that progres-
sion, then its proof-theoretic ordinal is Γ0 . In that case, though the system T
as a whole may not be justifiable predicatively, each theorem ϕ of T rests on
predicative grounds, at least indirectly. In practice, more can be said: T is
conservative over the autonomous ramified progression for arithmetic sentences,
i.e., if ϕ is arithmetical and provable in T then it is provable in that progres-
sion. For second-order T this can often be strengthened to conservativity for
Π11 sentences. In particular, in that case, any provable well-ordering of T is also
predicatively provable.
     The first two examples of unramified second-order locally predicatively jus-
tifiable systems were given in the paper Feferman (1964). The first of these was
obtained by replacing the progression of ramified theories RAα by a progres-
sion HCα of unramified second order theories, based on the Hyperarithmetic
(or ∆11 ) Comprehension Rule:

(∆11 − CR) From (∀x)[P (x) ↔ Q(x)] infer (∃X)(∀x)[x ∈ X ↔ P (x)],
where P (x) is any Π11 formula and Q(x) is any Σ11 formula (parameters allowed).
    The motivation for ∆11 − CR is the recognizable absoluteness (or invari-
ance) of provably ∆11 definitions, in the following sense. At each stage one has
recognized certain closure conditions on the “open” universe of sets, and the
definitions D(x) of sets introduced at the next stage should be independent of
what further closure conditions may be accepted. In the words of Poincaré, the
definitions used of objects in an incomplete totality should not be “disturbed
by the introduction of new elements.” Thus if U represents a universe of sets
(subsets of N ) satisfying given closure conditions and is extended to U 0 (satis-
fying the same closure conditions and possibly further ones) one wants D to be
                                                                     0
provably invariant or absolute in the sense that (∀x)[DU (x) ↔ DU (x)]. This re-
quirement is easily seen to hold for provably ∆11 formulas D, i.e., those for which
(∀x)[D(x) ↔ P (x)] has been proved where P and Q satisfy the hypothesis of the
rule ∆11 − CR.10 The progression of theories HCα is then obtained by suitable
transfinite iteration of the rule ∆11 − CR. Again, one can apply the notion of
autonomy to such a progression; it was shown that the least non-autonomous
ordinal of this progression is Γ0 , the union of the HCα for α < Γ0 is of the same
proof-theoretical strength as the union of the autonomous ramified progression,
and one has conservativity for Π11 formulas.
   9 See Feferman (1998) p. 193 for the notion of proof-theoretic reduction. Previously, I have

used ‘predicatively reducible’ for what is written here as ‘predicatively justifiable.’
  10 It has been shown in Feferman (1968) that every provably invariant formula is equivalent

to a provably ∆11 formula, so the rule ∆11 − CR is fully general for this requirement.


                                              17
    The second locally predicatively justifiable system introduced in Feferman
(1964) was obtained by replacing the autonomous progression of the HCα by a
single second-order system, denoted IR. This is axiomatized by the rule ∆11 −
CR together with what is called the Bar Rule in the proof-theoretic literature,
which allows one to infer the full scheme of transfinite induction on a recursive
ordering ≺ when W O(≺) has been established; correspondingly, one has a rule
for inferring a scheme of transfinite recursion on ≺ under the same hypothesis.
(The ‘I’ in ‘IR’ is for Induction, and the ‘R’ is for Recursion.) The main result
concerning IR stated in Feferman (1964) is that it proves the same theorems
as the union of the HCα for α < Γ0 , and thus it is predicatively reducible with
conservativity for Π11 formulas.
    The system of what is often referred to as second order arithmetic has the
Full (Π∞1 ) Comprehension Axiom Scheme


(Π∞
  1 − CA)       (∃X)(∀x)[x ∈ X ↔ ϕ]
where ϕ is an arbitrary second-order (Π∞
                                       1 ) formula which does not contain ‘X’
free. In 1976, Harvey Friedman introduced several subsystems of second-order
arithmetic whose common feature is that induction is restricted to its second-
order form, the Induction Axiom

(IA)     (∀X)[(0 ∈ X) ∧ (∀x)(x ∈ X → x0 ∈ X) → (∀x)(x ∈ X)].
In the presence of the full comprehension axiom one can infer from the induction
axiom IA the Induction Scheme considered as the collection of all formulas of
the form

(IS)     ϕ(0) ∧ (∀x)[ϕ(x) → ϕ(x0 )] → (∀x)ϕ(x)
for arbitrary second-order formulas ϕ. But in the restricted systems considered
by Friedman in which the comprehension axiom is considerably weakened, that
step is not possible. Following Friedman, these systems are indicated by a
subscript ‘0.’ An obvious choice for such to consider with respect to the present
subject is the system ACA0 obtained by replacing the full comprehension axiom
scheme by the sub-scheme in which only arithmetical formulas ϕ (no bound
second-order variables) are admitted. It is a classical result of proof theory that
the system ACA0 is a conservative extension of the first-order system of Peano
Arithmetic PA. On the other hand, the system ACA, which is obtained by use
of the full induction scheme (IS) in place of (IA), is stronger than PA; it is still
predicatively justifiable, but its proof theoretical ordinal is far below Γ0 .
    Another locally predicatively justifiable system introduced in Friedman (1976)
is denoted ATR0 . It has a certain similarity to IR, using axioms in place of
rules, as follows. In place of the ∆11 − CR one has the ∆11 − CA, i.e., the axiom
scheme
                 (∀x)[P (x) ↔ Q(x)] → (∃X)(∀x)[x ∈ X ↔ P (x)]
where P is Π11 and Q is Σ11 . In place of the transfinite recursion rule of IR one
has an axiom expressing that for all well-ordering relations Z one can construct

                                        18
the Turing jump hierarchy along Z starting with any set X, i.e., the relative
hyperarithmetical hierarchy along Z. The transfinite induction rule in IR is not
replaced by the corresponding axiom, as that would be too strong; in place of
it, the system ATR0 uses only the induction axiom (IA) for natural numbers
as above. Friedman’s main result announced in 1976 was that ATR0 is locally
predicatively justifiable with proof-theoretical ordinal Γ0 and is conservative
over IR for Π11 sentences; a full proof of this with further interesting results
about ATR0 is given in the paper Friedman, McAloon and Simpson (1982).
    Various wholly or locally predicatively justifiable systems of higher type are
surveyed in Avigad and Feferman (1998), sections 8.2 and 8.3. Systems of set
theory related to IR were treated in Feferman (1974), while ones related to
ATR0 have been dealt with in Simpson (1982). See also Simpson’s article
(2002),“Predicativity: the outer limits.”

  The mathematical reach of predicativity: positive developments

    Having established theoretical bounds to predicativity and workable unram-
ified predicatively justifiable systems, the next questions of interest are to see
what parts of “everyday” mathematics can be carried out within those bounds,
and what parts are essentially impredicative; the latter question is treated in the
next section. It turns out in practice that if a known mathematical result can be
established predicatively, it can already be done in a system conservative over
Peano Arithmetic (PA). In other words, the predicative part of everyday math-
ematics is robustly predicative. There is no theorem which can establish this; one
can only depend on various case studies for confirming evidence. One avenue
is that pursued in the so-called Reverse Mathematics (R.M.) program due to
Friedman and carried on most extensively by Simpson in his book, Subsystems
of Second Order Arithmetic (1999). The principal relevant system for the pos-
itive work on predicative mathematics in that framework is ACA0 , described
above, and conservative over PA. Another relevant system is much weaker, be-
ing based only on Weak König’s Lemma, i.e., the familiar tree lemma for infinite
branching binary trees; it is shown op. cit. that the associated system WKL0 is
conservative over the system PRA of Primitive Recursive Arithmetic. A second
avenue in which the positive reach of predicative mathematics has been studied
is via a system W (for ‘Weyl’) of flexible finite types introduced in the final part
of the article “Weyl vindicated” (Feferman 1988). The main proof-theoretical
result concerning W is that it is a conservative extension of PA (Feferman and
Jäger 1993, 1996). Only some points of general character concerning both of
these approaches will be indicated here.
    In W, types are variable; for any two types X and Y , one has existence of
their cartesian product X × Y , and the type Y (X) of all partial functions from
X to Y ; finally, for any type X and bounded formula ϕ one has the subtype
{x ∈ X : ϕ(x)} of X determined by ϕ. Starting from the type N of natural
numbers, one can introduce as usual the type Q of rational numbers, and then
the type R of real numbers considered as Cauchy sequences of rational num-
bers, identified under the usual equivalence relation. Then (partial) functions

                                        19
of real numbers can be treated as members of R(R) , and various spaces of such
functions (e.g., continuous, measurable, etc.) form examples for Hilbert spaces
and Banach spaces. Given any such space S, the functionals from S to R are
then certain members of R(S) . In practice, only separable spaces can be treated
predicatively, via a given countable dense subset.
    As for the program initiated by Weyl in 1918, the full classical analysis
of continuous functions can be carried out directly in W. Turning to more
general classes of functions from 20th century analysis such as come out of the
Lebesgue theory of measure, one first notes that the general notion of outer
measure can’t be defined in W, since it makes essential use of the g.l.b. as
applied to sets of reals, not sequences of reals. But the notion of measurable set
can be treated via sequences of open covers whose measure is directly defined,
and the notion of measurable function can be defined in terms of that or in
terms of sequences of approximating step functions. One cannot prove the
existence of Lebesgue non-measurable sets of reals; put in other terms, it is
consistent with W that all sets of reals are Lebesgue measurable. Various
parts of standard functional analysis have been verified in unpublished notes:
the Riesz representation theorem, Hahn-Banach theorem, uniform boundedness
theorem and open mapping theorem for separable Hilbert and Banach spaces.
Finally, one can obtain the principal results of the spectral theory of bounded
as well as unbounded self-adjoint linear operators on a separable Hilbert space.
Subsequent to this work, it has been shown in the dissertation of Feng Ye (1999)
that much of this work can already be carried out in a constructive subsystem
of W, conservative over PRA.
    By comparison, in the R.M. program sharper results have been obtained, of
the form that over a weak base system RCA0 , various of these results in analysis
are actually equivalent to ACA0 (if not already to WKL0 ); these are detailed in
Simpson (1999). However, since the systems considered in the R.M. program are
all subsystems of second-order arithmetic, there is a cost involved, namely that
higher type notions such as those of functions of real numbers, function spaces
and functionals, cannot be dealt with directly but must somehow be coded in
second-order terms. If one is not concerned with obtaining exact equivalences
between mathematical results and the second-order set and function existence
principles on which they ultimately rest, the positive predicative development
of analysis is carried out much more naturally in systems like W.

            The outer mathematical bounds of predicativity

    Turning now to mathematical results which cannot be carried out predica-
tively, the easiest proofs of independence are those which can be established by
models in the hyperarithmetic sets. For example, independence of the existence
of non-measurable sets of reals stems from the fact that every ∆11 set of reals
has HY P Lebesgue measure. Another example using HY P that was found by
Kreisel (1959) is the impredicativity of the Cantor-Bendixson theorem, which



                                       20
asserts that every closed set of reals is the union of a perfect set and a count-
able (scattered) set. The HY P model can also be used to obtain examples of
impredicative theorems in Abelian group theory (Feferman 1975).
    For independence results closer to the bounds of predicativity, one must fall
back on proof-theoretic results. For example, any theorem equivalent to ATR0
is at the exact limit Γ0 of predicativity, and is thus impredicative. Simpson
(2002) gives a number of examples of theorems from descriptive set theory that
are equivalent to ATR0 over RCA0 , such as that every uncountable closed
(or analytic) set contains a perfect subset. Also, ATR0 is equivalent to com-
parability of countable well-orderings. Other independence results have come
from combinatorics rather than analysis, set theory, or algebra. They are of
interest because the statements are arithmetical, in fact in Π02 form. One group
of these has to do with variants of the Ramsey coloring theorem, such as the
Paris-Harrington (1977) version independent of PA. Friedman, McAloon and
Simpson (1982) have given a mathematically natural finite combinatorial theo-
rem which is equivalent to ATR0 over RCA0 . Friedman showed that certain
simple Π02 consequences of Kruskal’s theorem about embeddings of finite trees
are not even provable in ATR0 (cf. Simpson 2002 for references and further
developments).

            Predicativity and the indispensability arguments11

    The idea that natural science justifies a part of mathematics because of its
indispensability to science—and that that is the only part of mathematics that is
justified—is due to Willard Quine and Hilary Putnam among others. Famously,
Quine has written:
      So much of mathematics as is wanted for use in empirical science is
      for me on a par with the rest of science. Transfinite ramifications
      are on the same footing insofar as they come of a simplificatory
      rounding out, but anything further is on a par with uninterpreted
      systems. (Quine 1984, p. 788).

Quine argued that we need the power set operation in set theory to establish
the existence of the real numbers R and then its application once more to obtain
such sets as that of all functions from R to R. That led him by a “simplificatory
rounding out” to acceptance of finite iterations of the power set, but not its
ω th iteration over the natural numbers. In other words, Quine was led thus
to accept Zermelo set theory but nothing stronger, which he looked upon as
“mathematical recreation and without ontological rights” (Quine 1986, p. 400).
Penelope Maddy has characterized the indispensability arguments (for critical
purposes), as follows:
  11 Re the indispensability arguments, see also the relevant sections of the chapters by Resnik

and Maddy in this volume.




                                              21
     We have good reason to believe our best scientific theories, and math-
     ematical entities are indispensable to those theories, so we have good
     reason to believe in mathematical entities. Mathematics is thus on
     an ontological par with natural science. Furthermore, the evidence
     that confirms scientific theories also confirms the required mathe-
     matics, so [that part of] mathematics and science are on an episte-
     mological par as well. (Maddy 1992, p. 78)

   In (Feferman 1993, reprinted in 1998) I considered the significance for the
indispensability arguments of the positive developments of parts of mathematics
by predicative means in the following terms (1998, p. 284): if one accepts the
indispensability arguments [of course one might argue against them on philo-
sophical grounds] there remain two critical questions:

   Q1. Just which mathematical entities are indispensable to current scientific
theories?

   Q2. Just what principles concerning those entities are needed for the re-
quired mathematics?

    The positive developments described above are brought to bear on these
questions as follows. On their basis, I had formulated the working hypothesis
that all of scientifically applicable analysis can be developed in the system W,
and argued that this has been verified in its core parts (cf. 1998, pp. 280-283
and 293-294). Of course, there are results of theoretical analysis which cannot
be carried out predicatively, either because they are essentially impredicative in
their very formulation, or because they are independent of predicative systems
such as the examples given above. However, none of those affects the working
hypothesis because they do not figure in the applicable mathematics. What
is more to the point are examples closer to the margin scientifically, e.g., the
proposed use of certain non-separable spaces for a quantum-mechanical model
involving infinitely many degrees of freedom in Emch (1972, p. 103); contra that
one can appeal to the arguments on physical grounds by Streater and Wightman
(1978, p. 87).12 Of course the working hypothesis may yet prove to be wrong
by other examples, but as of now, all evidence is in its favor. If one accepts it,
one can return to the questions Q1 and Q2 as follows:

     By the fact of the proof-theoretical reduction of W to PA, the only
     ontology it commits one to is that which justifies acceptance of PA.
     But even there, the answer to Q1 and thence to Q2 is underdeter-
     mined. One view of PA is that it is about the natural numbers
     as independently existing abstract objects; that is ... a platonistic
     view, albeit an extremely moderate one. ... Or one can make use of
     the fact that PA is reducible to HA [Heyting Arithmetic] to justify
 12 See Feferman (1998) p. 282 for a fuller discussion.




                                             22
     it on the basis of a more constructive ontology. (Feferman 1998, p.
     296).
From this and related arguments, I drew the conclusion that
     ...if one accepts the indispensability arguments, practically nothing
     philosophically definitive can be said of the entities which are then
     supposed to have the same status—ontologically and epistemologi-
     cally—as the entities of natural science. That being the case, what
     do the indispensability arguments amount to? As far as I’m con-
     cerned, they are completely vitiated. (ibid., p. 297).


                 Rethinking predicativity II: 1970-1996.

    In Kreisel’s article “Principles of proof and ordinals implicit in given con-
cepts” (1970), he criticized existing proof theory for “the lack of a clear and
convincing analysis of the choice of methods of proof,” and took as his ultimate
aim “the discovery of objective criteria for such a choice” [italics in the origi-
nal]. “What one is after is a (phenomenological) description of certain kinds P
of mathematical reasoning; the objective question is then simply this: whether
the proofs represented ... by derivations of a given formal system F are in P
(soundness of F); [and] whether all proofs in P are represented in F (complete-
ness with respect to ... provability in P).” The particular kinds of reasoning P
considered with respect to this aim were described as an answer to the following:
     What principles of proof do we recognize as valid once we have under-
     stood (or, as one sometimes says, ‘accepted’) certain given concepts?
     (Kreisel 1970, p. 489)
As a further elaboration, “[t]he process of recognizing the validity of such prin-
ciples (including the principles for defining new concepts, that is, formally, of
extending a given language) is here conceived as a process of reflection... . ...
Granted that we have to do with an area P which lends itself to the kind of
analysis indicated, it is evident that ordinals play a basic role. They index the
stages in the reflection process.”
    The two principal basic concepts considered by Kreisel (op. cit., p. 490) are,
in his terminology:

   1. The concepts of ω-sequence and ω-iteration.

   2. The concepts of set of natural numbers and numerical quantification.
Kreisel pointed out that this is related to earlier work on autonomous progres-
sions for finitist mathematics (in Kreisel 1958 and 1965) and for predicative
mathematics (in Feferman 1964).
    This rethinking of predicativity, and relatedly, of finitism, was persuasive
to me except for the idea that one would expect the stages of reflection to be

                                       23
indexed by (possibly) transfinite ordinals, though such ordinals might well be
used metamathematically in an evaluation of the proof-theoretical strength of
the system F proposed to represent P. In my view, the F considered for a given
P should not be taken to involve the notions of ordinal or well-ordering in any
way that is not already contained in the basic concepts of P. The formulation
of this went through several stages, marked among others by the publications
(Feferman 1979 and 1991), arriving most recently at the general notion of un-
folding, as first explained in “Gödel’s program for new axioms: why, where, how,
and what?” (Feferman 1996). That also pointed to the possible applicability of
the notion to systems of set theory at the other extreme to finitism, in which
certain axioms for “large cardinals” would be derived that would fulfill Gödel’s
view that the familiar systems such as ZFC “can be supplemented without ar-
bitrariness by new axioms which are only the natural continuation of those set
up so far” (Gödel 1947, p. 520). The idea of unfolding is outlined next.

                           Predicativity as unfolding13

    It is of the essence of the notion of unfolding that we are dealing with
schematically presented formal systems. In the usual conception, formal
schemata for axioms and rules of inference employ free predicate variables
P, Q, . . . of various numbers of arguments n ≥ 0. An appropriate substitution
for P (x1 , . . . , xn ) in such a scheme is a formula ϕ(x1 , . . . xn ), possibly with ad-
ditional parameters. Familiar examples of axiom schemata in the propositional
and predicate calculus are

                  ¬P → (P → Q)            and       (∀x)P (x) → P (t).

The induction axiom scheme in non-finitist arithmetic is given by

                      P (0) ∧ (∀x)[P (x) → P (x0 )] → (∀x)P (x).

In set theory, familiar axiom schemes which can be represented similarly are
those for Separation and Replacement.
    Also rules of inference may be represented schematically, such as Modus Po-
nens in the propositional calculus and Universal Generalization in the predicate
calculus, given respectively by

             P, P → Q/Q          and       [P → Q(x)]/[P → (∀x)Q(x)].
In finitist arithmetic, in which quantification over the natural numbers is not
accepted, the basic principle of induction is given by the rule:

                              P (0), P (x) → P (x0 )/P (x).
 13 This section is adapted from Feferman (1996).




                                            24
    The informal philosophy behind the use of schemata in the concept of un-
folding is their open-endedness. That is, they are not conceived of as applying
to a specific language whose stock of basic symbols is fixed in advance, but
rather as applicable to any language which one comes to recognize as embody-
ing meaningful basic notions. Put in other terms, implicit in the acceptance of
given schemata is the acceptance of any meaningful substitution instances. But
it need not be determined in advance which substitution instances are to be
accepted. Thus, for example, if one accepts the axioms and rules of the classical
propositional calculus given in schematic form, one will accept all substitution
instances of these schemata in any language which one comes to employ.
    The question which the notion of unfolding is supposed to address is: given
a schematic system S, which operations and predicates—and which principles
concerning them—ought to be accepted if one has accepted S ? The answer for
operations is straightforward: any operation from and to individuals is accepted
which is determined explicitly or implicitly from the basic operations of S. More-
over, the principles which are added concerning these operations are just those
which are derived from the way that they are introduced. Ordinarily, we would
confine ourselves to the total operations obtained in this way, i.e., those which
have been proved to be defined for all values of their arguments, but it should
not be excluded that the introduction might depend on prior partial operations,
e.g., those introduced by recursive definitions of a general form. The question
concerning predicates in the unfolding of S is treated in operational terms as
well, i.e.: which operations on and to predicates–and which principles concerning
them—ought to be accepted if one has accepted S ? For this, it is necessary to
tell at the outset which logical operations on predicates are taken for granted in
S. For example, in the case of non-finitist classical arithmetic, these would be
(say) the operations ¬, ∧ and ∀, while in the case of finitist arithmetic we would
be limited to positive propositional connectives and (in one formulation) the ∃
operator.
    As a general background theory to unfolding for arbitrary S, one assumes a
kind of proto-mathematical theory of operations and predicates, which makes
only those assumptions that appear in every mathematical theory. The theory
of operations can be typed or untyped; the latter, which is formally simpler, is
taken to be a form of partial combinatory algebra with pairing and projection
operations. These provide for closure of both operations and predicates under
explicit definition. In addition, the combinatory setup allows one to construct a
generalized recursion or fixed point operator which assures the uniform implicit
definition from any given f of a (possibly partial) operation g satisfying

                                     g = f g.

   One general (logic independent) operation on predicates is given a distin-
guished role, since we consider the case when it is not used. Given a total
operation f on a domain M to n-ary predicates over M , say f x = Px for each
x ∈ M , the join operation J is used to form the predicate J(f ) = P satisfying


                                       25
for all x, x1 , . . . , xn :

                               P (x, x1 , ..., xn ) ↔ Px (x1 , . . . , xn ).

   The operational unfolding of a schematic system S, in symbols U0 (S), makes
use only of the background theory of operations over the given operations of
S, i.e., it does not make use of any operations on or to predicates. The full
(operational and predicate) unfolding of S, in symbols U(S) also admits the
background theory of operations on and to predicates over the given logical
operations of S, including the join operator J. The intermediate (operational
and predicate) unfolding of S, in symbols U1 (S), is the same without the join
operator. Systems are unfolded by establishing the definedness and uniqueness
of more and more operations of the various kinds. These serve to expand the
language and thence the formulas ϕ which can be admitted to the

(Substitution Rule)             A(P )/A(x̂.ϕ(x)).
    As an example, the schematic system NFA of Non-Finitist Arithmetic is
given with basic operations on individuals of successor Sc, predecessor P d and
the 0-ary operation (constant) 0, and a schematic predicate symbol P (x). In
the intermediate and full unfoldings, the basic logical operations assumed are
¬, ∧ and ∀. The basic axioms of NFA are simply the following three, where we
write x0 for Sc(x):
    Ax 1. x0 6= 0.
    Ax 2. P d(x0 ) = x.
    Ax 3. P (0) ∧ (∀x)[P (x) → P (x0 )] → (∀x)P (x).
    In my paper with Thomas Strahm, “The unfolding of non-finitist arith-
metic” (2000) the following results are proved, where ≡ is the relation of proof-
theoretical equivalence, PA is the usual system of Peano Arithmetic, and RA<α
is the union of the systems RAβ of ramified analysis to level β, for β < α.

   (i) U0 (NFA) ≡ PA
  (ii) U1 (NFA) ≡ RA<ω .
 (iii) U(NFA) ≡ RA<Γ0 .

In other words, the full operational and predicate unfolding of NFA is proof-
theoretically equivalent to predicative analysis as characterized via the au-
tonomous progression of ramified theories. The first step in getting PA con-
tained in U0 (NFA) is to establish successively the definedness of all primitive
recursive functions.14
    In an abstract with Strahm, “Unfolding finitist arithmetic” (2001) we have
announced the following result for a system FA of Finitist Arithmetic with
  14 Actually, in Feferman and Strahm (2000) we made use of a background theory of typed

operations with general Least Fixed Point operator, but we have also verified the results as
stated here for the untyped background theory.


                                                   26
the restricted operations on predicates indicated above, and with the induction
axiom replaced by the quantifier-free induction rule.15 Here we obtained, in
terms of the system PRA of Primitive Recursive Arithmetic:

                       U0 (FA) ≡ U1 (FA) ≡ U(FA) ≡ PRA.

This is in accord with Tait’s argument (1981) that finitism is formally repre-
sented by PRA.
    Kreisel’s work on finitism in terms of certain autonomous progressions (1958
and 1965) led to a system whose proof-theoretical strength is Peano Arithmetic
PA. It should be possible to expand the system FA to a system FA∗ whose
unfolding is exactly PA in strength. The guess is that this would be obtained
by adding a suitable form of the Bar Rule in the language of FA informally
expressed as follows: if ≺ is a decidable ordering and it has been proved (with
free variable f ) that f is not descending in ≺, then one can apply transfinite
induction to ≺.

Conjecture.      U(FA∗ ) ≡ PA.
If this is right, what gives Kreisel’s characterization of finitism its unexpected
strength is his implicit use of a notion of finitist well-ordering.

                      What is predicativity? (Summary)

     The idea of predicativity started in a negative frame of mind with the iden-
tification of a vicious circle in the use of definitions purported to single out
an object D from a supposed totality V by essential reference to the entirety
of V . Such a definition was considered to be problematic when V is in some
sense essentially ill-defined, not “actual” or “complete.” To begin with, the fo-
cus was on the supposed totalities of all sets or all ordinal or cardinal numbers
in the framework of Cantorian set theory. The radical diagnosis of Kronecker,
Poincaré and Brouwer saw a threat to mathematics in all assumptions of the
actual infinite, even down to the natural numbers. Hilbert too, in his consis-
tency program to secure infinitistic mathematics was infected in this way and,
in the words of Paul Bernays, “it became his goal to do battle with Kronecker
with his own weapon of finiteness” by way of inoculation.
    Less radical at first, Weyl accepted the set N of natural numbers as a com-
pleted totality, but not the real numbers, or what comes to the same thing
foundationally, the totality of all subsets of N . Thus was born the concept of
predicativity given the natural numbers, and the investigation of its reach in
practice. That there is a fundamental difference between our understanding of
the concept of natural numbers and our understanding of the set concept, even
for sets of natural numbers, is undeniable. The study of predicativity given the
   15 Preparation of a full presentation of the system FA and the proof of the theorem about

it is in progress.



                                            27
natural numbers is thus of special foundational significance, and is the one that
has received the most detailed investigation, as described in the sections above.
This is not to say that only what is predicative in that sense is justified. What
we are dealing with here are questions of relative conceptual clarity and founda-
tional status. Parallel to the development of predicative mathematics was the
pursuit of finitist mathematics in the hands, to begin with, of Skolem (1923)
and, much later, Goodstein (1957). Both were overshadowed in the foundational
wars by the intuitionists, the most radical of the radicals.
    With the rise in the 1950s of metamathematics as a substantial discipline
and broadly applicable tool, these directions became the subject of logical anal-
ysis at the hands of philosophically motivated but not necessarily ideologically
committed logicians such as Kleene and Kreisel. Kleene was concerned, in effect,
with what definition processes (recursive, hyperarithmetic, etc.) were implicit
in accepting given notions. Kreisel shifted the attention to what proof processes
were implicit in these. The notion of unfolding of schematic formal systems
evolved from his 1970 paper “Principles of proofs and ordinals implicit in given
concepts.” The aim was to put that in more general form by not assuming the
notion of ordinal as part of the basic description. The first results described
above are gratifying in this respect: the full unfolding of the system NFA of
Non-Finitist Arithmetic is equivalent to the characterization in terms of the
autonomous progression of ramified systems, of predicativity given the natural
numbers, while that of the system FA of Finitist Arithmetic is equivalent to
primitive recursive arithmetic.
    Are those the only two senses of predicativity to be considered? In one
direction, stronger notions of predicativity than that, given the natural num-
bers, were suggested by work in the late 1950s of Paul Lorenzen, John Myhill
and Hao Wang. In particular, the paper of Lorenzen and Myhill (1959) in-
volves the acceptance in a certain constructive form of the countable ordinals
and of inductive proof and definition on them. In metamathematical terms,
their principles would legitimate a system of strength at least that of ID1 , the
theory of one generalized inductive definition. In quite the opposite direction,
Edward Nelson published a monograph, Predicative Arithmetic (1986), which
perhaps more properly should have been entitled Strictly Finitist Arithmetic,
whose admissible principles place it within the systems of “feasible” or “poly-
time” arithmetic that have been developed by Sam Buss and others, systems
that form a very weak fragment of primitive recursive arithmetic (cf. Buss 1986).
And somewhere between these are two papers of Geoffrey Hellman and myself,
“Predicative foundations of arithmetic” (1995) and “Challenges to predicative
foundations of arithmetic” (2000), where we argue in particular for a concept of
predicativity given the notion of finite set, and in general for predicativity as a
relative rather than an absolute concept. In addition, concepts of predicativity
given the notion of finitist ordinal and even of predicativity given the notion
of the cumulative hierarchy of sets have been indicated above. These open up
a series of more or less specific problems to be tackled in terms of the concept
of unfolding. To begin with, these problems call for the formulation of basic


                                        28
schematic systems as simple and natural as NFA and FA for the weaker or
stronger notions indicated in the various mentioned developments, and then the
determination of the reach of the corresponding systems of unfolding.
    So if one accepts this more general standpoint, one answer to the question
“What is predicativity?” is that it is a concept applicable to different founda-
tional stances given by the rejection of the actual infinite for various domains,
coupled with its possible limited acceptance for others. The logical problem in
each case is to characterize exactly the limits of that particular stance. The
potential value for philosophy then is to be able to say in sharper terms what
arguments may be mounted for or against taking such a stance.
    I wish to conclude with a brief indication—to the extent that it is relevant—
of my own point of view philosophically, which has both negative and positive
aspects.16 On the negative side, I am a confirmed anti-platonist. On the positive
side, I am a realist insofar as the natural numbers are concerned, i.e., I believe
that statements about the natural number structure have a determinate truth
value independent of human proofs and constructions. What more? It might
be thought that since I have spent so many years working on predicativity that
I consider it the be-all and end-all in non-platonistic foundations. Rather, as I
wrote in the Preface to In the Light of Logic, p. ix, I believe that

     [predicativity given the natural numbers] should be looked upon as
     the philosophy of how we get off the ground and sustain flight mathe-
     matically without assuming more than the basic structure of natural
     numbers to begin with. There are less clear-cut conceptions which
     can lead us higher into the mathematical stratosphere, for example
     that of various kinds of sets generated by infinitary closure condi-
     tions. That such conceptions are less clear-cut than the natural
     number system is no reason not to use them, but one should look
     to see where it is necessary to use them and what we can say about
     what it is we know when we do use them.

 16 See also Feferman (1998), pp. 123-124.




                                             29
                               References
J. Avigad and S. Feferman (1998), Gödel’s functional (“Dialectica”) interpreta-
tion, in Handbook of Proof Theory (S. Buss, ed.), Elsevier (Amsterdam), 337-
405.

S. Buss (1986), Bounded Arithmetic, Studies in Proof Theory Lecture Notes,
Bibliopolis (Naples).

C. Chihara (1973), Ontology and the Vicious Circle Principle, Cornell Univ.
Press (Ithaca).

Ph. de Rouilhan (1996), Russell et le circle des paradoxes, PUF (Paris).

G. G. Emch (1972), Algebraic Methods in Statistical Mechanics and Quantum
Field Theory, Wiley and Sons (New York).

S. Feferman (1964), Systems of predicative analysis, J. Symbolic Logic 29, 1-30.

S. Feferman (1968), Persistent and invariant formulas for outer extensions, Com-
positio Mathematica 20, 29-52.

S. Feferman (1974), Predicatively reducible systems of set theory, in Axiomatic
Set Theory, Part 2 (D. S. Scott and T. Jech, eds.), Proceedings of Symposia in
Pure Mathematics XIII, Amer. Math. Soc. (Providence), 11-32.

S. Feferman (1975), Impredicativity of the existence of the largest divisible sub-
group of an abelian p-group, in Model Theory and Algebra. A Memorial Tribute
to Abraham Robinson (D. H. Saracino and V. B. Weispfenning, eds.), Lecture
Notes in Mathematics 498, Springer-Verlag (Berlin), 117-130.

S. Feferman (1979), A more perspicuous system for predicativity, in Konstruk-
tionen vs. Positionen, Band II (K. Lorenz, ed.), Walter de Gruyter (Berlin),
68-93.

S. Feferman (1988), Weyl vindicated. Das Kontinuum 70 years later, in Temi
et prospettive della logica e della filosofia della scienza contemporanee, Vol. 1,
CLUEB (Bologna). Reprinted with a Postscript in Feferman (1998), 249-283.

S. Feferman (1991), Reflecting on incompleteness, J. Symbolic Logic 56, 1-49.

S. Feferman (1993), Why a little bit goes a long way. Logical foundations of sci-
entifically applicable mathematics, in PSA 1992, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science
Association (East Lansing), 442-455. Reprinted in Feferman (1998), 284-298.



                                       30
S. Feferman (1996), Gödel’s program for new axioms. Why, where, how and
what?, in Gödel ‘96 (P. Hajek, ed.), Lecture Notes in Logic 6, Assoc. for Sym-
bolic Logic, distributed by A. K. Peters, Ltd. (Natick), 3-22.

S. Feferman (1998), In the Light of Logic, Oxford Univ. Press (New York).

S. Feferman and G. Hellman (1995), Predicative foundations of arithmetic, J.
of Philosophical Logic 24, 1-17.

S. Feferman and G. Hellman (2000), Challenges to predicative foundations of
arithmetic, in Between Logic and Intuition. Essays in Honor of Charles Parsons
(G. Sher and R. Tieszen, eds.), Cambridge Univ. Press (Cambridge), 317-338.

S. Feferman and G. Jäger (1993), Systems of explicit mathematics with non-
constructive µ-operator, Part I, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 65, 243-263.

S. Feferman and G. Jäger (1996), Systems of explicit mathematics with non-
constructive µ-operator, Part II, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 79, 37-52.

S. Feferman and T. Strahm (2000), The unfolding of non-finitist arithmetic,
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 104, 75-96.

S. Feferman and T. Strahm (2001), The unfolding of finitist arithmetic (ab-
stract), Bull. Symbolic Logic 7, 111-112.

H. Friedman (1976), Systems of second order arithmetic with restricted induc-
tion, I, II (abstracts), J. Symbolic Logic 41, 557-559.

H. Friedman, K. McAloon and S. Simpson (1982), A finite combinatorial princi-
ple which is equivalent to the 1-consistency of predicative arithmetic, in Patras
Logic Symposion (G. Metakides, ed.), North-Holland (Amsterdam), 197-230.

R. O. Gandy (1960), Proof of Mostowski’s conjecture, Bulletin de l’Academie
Polonaise des Sciences, Série des sciences mathématiques, astronomiques et
physiques 8, 571-575.

K. Gödel (1939), Consistency proof for the generalized continuum hypothesis,
Proc. National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 25, 220-224. Reprinted in Gödel
(1990), 28-32.

K. Gödel (1944), Russell’s mathematical logic, in The Philosophy of Bertrand
Russell (P. A. Schilpp, ed.), Library of Living Philosophers, vol. 5, Northwest-
ern University (Evanston), 123-153. Reprinted in Gödel (1990), 119-141.

K. Gödel (1947), What is Cantor’s continuum problem?, Amer. Mathematical
Monthly 54, 515-525; errata, 55, 151. Reprinted in Gödel (1990) 176-187.

                                       31
K. Gödel (1990), Collected Works, Vol. II. Publications 1938-1974 (S. Fefer-
man, et al., eds.), Oxford Univ. Press (New York).

W. Goldfarb (1988), Poincaré against the logicists, in History and Philosophy of
Modern Mathematics (W. Aspray and P. Kitcher, eds.), Minnesota Studies in
the Philosophy of Science, Vol. XI, University of Minnesota Press (Minneapo-
lis), 61-81.

R. L. Goodstein (1957), Recursive Number Theory, North-Holland (Amster-
dam).

A. Grzegorczyck (1955), Elementary definable analysis, Fundamenta Mathemat-
icae 41, 311-338.

M. Hallett (1990), Review of Goldfarb (1988), J. Symbolic Logic 55, 1315-1319.

G. Heinzmann (1986), ed. Poincaré, Russell, Zermelo et Peano. Textes de la
discussion (1906-1912) sur les fondements des mathématiques: des antinomies
à la prédicativité, Albert Blanchard (Paris).

S. C. Kleene (1955), Hierarchies of number-theoretic predicates, Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc. 61, 193-213.

S. C. Kleene (1959), Quantification of number-theoretic functions, Compositio
Mathematica 14, 23-40.

G. Kreisel (1958), Ordinal logics and the characterization of informal concepts
of proof, Proc. of the International Congress of Mathematicians, 14-21 August
1958, 289-299.

G. Kreisel (1959), Analysis of the Cantor-Bendixson theorem by means of the
analytic hierarchy, Bulletin de l’Académie Polonaise des Sciences 10, 621-626.

G. Kreisel (1960), La predicativité, Bulletin de la Société Mathématiques de
France 88, 371-391.

G. Kreisel (1965), Mathematical logic, in Lectures on Modern Mathematics III
(T. L. Saaty, ed.), Wiley and Sons (New York), 95-195.

G. Kreisel (1970), Principles of proof and ordinals implicit in given concepts, in
Intuitionism and Proof Theory (A. Kino et al., eds.), North-Holland (Amster-
dam), 489-516.

P. Lorenzen (1955), Einführung in die Operative Logik und Mathematik. Springer-
Verlag (Berlin).

                                       32
P. Lorenzen and J. Myhill (1959), Constructive definition of certain analytic
sets of numbers, J. Symbolic Logic 24, 37-49.

P. Maddy (1992), Indispensability and practice, J. of Philosophy 59, 275-289.

P. Mancosu (1998), From Brouwer to Hilbert. The Debate on the Foundations
of Mathematics in the 1920s, Oxford Univ. Press (New York).

J. Myhill (1974), The undefinability of the set of natural numbers in the ramified
Principia, in Bertrand Russell’s Philosophy (G. Nakhnikian, ed.), Duckworth
(London), 19-27.

E. Nelson (1986), Predicative Arithmetic, Princeton Univ. Press (Princeton).

J. Paris and L. Harrington 1977, A mathematical incompleteness in Peano
Arithmetic, in Handbook of Mathematical Logic (J. Barwise, ed.), North-Holland
(Amsterdam), 1133-1142.

H. Poincaré (1906), Les mathématiques et la logique, Revue de métaphysique et
de morale 14, 294-317. Reprinted in Heinzmann (1986), 11-53.

G. Pólya (1972), Eine Erinnerung an Hermann Weyl, Mathematische Zeitschrift
126, 296-298.

W. V. Quine (1984), Review of Charles Parsons’ Mathematics in Philosophy, J.
of Philosophy 81, 783-794.

W. V. Quine (1986), Reply to Charles Parsons, in The Philosophy of W. V.
Quine, I, (L. H. Hahn and P. A. Schilpp, eds.), Library of Living Philosophers
vol. 18, Open Court (Lasalle), 396-403.

J. Richard (1905), Les principes des mathématiques et le problème des ensem-
bles, Revue générales des sciences pures et appliquées 16, 541. English transla-
tion in van Heijenoort (1967), 142-144.

B. Russell (1906), On some difficulties in the theory of transfinite numbers and
order types, Proc. London Mathematical Society 4, 29-53. Reprinted in Russell
(1973), 135-164.

B. Russell (1906a), Les paradoxes de la logique, Revue de métaphysique et de
morale 14, 627-650. Reprinted in Heinzmann (1986), 121-144; English version
under the title “On ‘insolubilia’ and their solution by mathematical logic” in
Russell (1973), 190-214.




                                        33
B. Russell (1908), Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types, Amer.
J. of Mathematics 30, 222-262. Reprinted in van Heijenoort (1967),150-182.

B. Russell (1973), Essays in Analysis (D. Lackey, ed.), George Braziller (New
York).

K. Schütte (1965), Predicative well-orderings, in Formal Systems and Recursive
Functions (J. Crossley and M. Dummett, eds.), North-Holland (Amsterdam),
279-302.

K. Schütte (1965a), Eine Grenze für die Beweisbarkeit der Transfiniten In-
duktion in der verzweigten Typenlogik, Archiv für mathematischen Logik und
Grundlagenforschung 7, 45-60.

K. Schütte (1977), Proof Theory, Springer-Verlag (Berlin).

S. Simpson (1982), Set theoretic aspects of AT R0 , in Logic Colloquium ’80 (D.
van Dalen et al., eds.), North-Holland (Amsterdam), 255-271.

S. Simpson (1999), Subsystems of Second Order Arithmetic, Perspectives in
Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag (Berlin).

S. Simpson (2002), Predicativity: The outer limits, in Reflections on the Foun-
dations of Mathematics. Essays in Honor of Solomon Feferman, (W. Sieg, R.
Sommer and C. Talcott, eds.), Lecture Notes in Logic 15, Association for Sym-
bolic Logic, distributed by A. K. Peters, Ltd. (Natick).

T. Skolem (1923), Begründung der elementaren Arithmetik durch die rekurri-
erende Denkwiese ohne Anwendung scheinbarer Veränderlichen mit unendlichem
Ausdehnungsbereich, Skrifter utgit av Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania, I. Mate-
matisk-naturvidenskabelig klasse no. 6, 1-38. English translation in van Hei-
jenoort (1967) 302-333.

C. Spector (1955), Recursive well-orderings, J. Symbolic Logic 20, 151-163.

C. Spector (1957), Recursive ordinals and predicative set theory, in Summaries
of Talks Presented at the Summer Institute for Symbolic Logic, Cornell Uni-
versity 1957, facsimile in 1968 by microfilm-xerography, University Microfilms
(Ann Arbor), 377-382.

C. Spector (1960), Hyperarithmetical quantifiers, Fundamenta mathematicae
48, 313-320.

R. F. Streater and A. S. Wightman (1978), PCT, Spin and Statistics, and All
That, 2nd edn., Benjamin/Cummings (New York).



                                      34
W. Tait (1981), Finitism, J. of Philosophy 78, 524-546.

J. van Heijenoort (1967), From Frege to Gödel. A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic 1879-1931, Harvard Univ. Press (Cambridge).

H. Wang (1954), The formalization of mathematics, J. Symbolic Logic 19, 241-
266.

H. Weyl (1918), Das Kontinuum. Kritischen Untersuchungen über die Grund-
lagen der Analysis, Veit (Leipzig).

H. Weyl (1949), Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science, Princeton
Univ. Press (Princeton).

H. Weyl (1987), The Continuum. A Critical Examination of the Foundations of
Analysis (English translation of Weyl 1918, by S. Pollard and T. Bole), Thomas
Jefferson Press, distributed by Univ. Press of America (Latham).

A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell (1925), Principia Mathematica, Vol. 1, 2nd.
edn., Cambridge Univ. Press (Cambridge).

F. Ye (1999), Strict Constructivism and the Philosophy of Mathematics, Ph. D.
dissertation, Dept. of Philosophy, Princeton University.

E. Zermelo (1908), Neuer Beweis für die Möglichkeit einer Wohlordnung, Math-
ematische Annalen 65, 107-128. Reprinted in Heinzmann (1986), 157-178; En-
glish translation in van Heijenoort (1967), 183-198.




                                      35
