Syntax and Semantics of Quantitative Type Theory
Robert Atkey
University of Strathclyde
robert.atkey@strath.ac.uk
Abstract
We present Quantitative Type Theory, a Type Theory that records
usage information for each variable in a judgement, based on a
previous system by McBride. The usage information is used to give
a realizability semantics using a variant of Linear Combinatory
Algebras, refining the usual realizability semantics of Type Theory
by accurately tracking resource behaviour. We define the semantics
in terms of Quantitative Categories with Families, a novel extension
of Categories with Families for modelling resource sensitive type
theories.
CCS Concepts •Theory of computation→ Linear logic; Type
theory;
Keywords Type Theory, Linear Logic
ACM Reference Format:
Robert Atkey. 2018. Syntax and Semantics of Quantitative Type Theory. In
LICS ’18: 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science,
July 9–12, 2018, Oxford, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209108.3209189
1 Introduction
Dependent Type Theory promises to combine “programming” and
“verification” by combining both in a single system. The implementa-
tions Agda [34] and Idris [7] advertise themselves as a “dependently
typed functional programming language” and a “general purpose
pure functional programming language with dependent types”, re-
spectively. Coq [24] is primarily intended as a proof assistant, but
also provides a program extraction facility.
However, when trying to actually use Type Theory as a general
purpose programming language, type dependency appears to ac-
tively encourage inefficient code. This is caused by Type Theory’s
use of variables for two purposes: as information to be used in
the formation of types, for example, the type Fin(n) of naturals
bounded by n depends on the natural number n when type check-
ing, but not a runtime; and as computational information that is
manipulated by programs at runtime. An example is illustrated by
the type of the cons operation for length indexed vectors of Ss:
cons : (n : nat) → S → vec n S → vec (succ n) S
A naive implementation of length indexed vectors will store, for
every element: a value s; a tail v; and a natural number n recording
the length ofv. If a unary representation of natural numbers is used,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LICS ’18, July 9–12, 2018, Oxford, United Kingdom
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5583-4/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209108.3209189
then this can easily lead to a runtime representation of vectors that
consumes memory space quadratic in the length of the list!
Related to the problem of distinguishing between type formation
and computational use of data is distinguishing between different
kinds of computational use of data. Such information can be used
to generate more efficient code, or to ensure that programs only use
computational resources in restricted ways (allowing, for example,
in place update of memory). Linear Logic [14] initiated a body of
research into such systems. Initially, this recorded zero, single, or
multiple uses (made explicit by Mogensen [28]), but recent work
in coeffects and quantitative types by Petricek et al. [29], Brunel
et al.[8], and Ghica and Smith [13] refined this to track usage via
semirings. However, extending these systems to dependent Type
Theory is not straightforward due to the conflict between type
formation and computational uses.
McBride [25] has recently proposed a resolution to this conflict
by combining the work on erasability and quantitative types. His
insight is to use the 0 of the semiring to represent information
that is erased at runtime, but is still available for use in types (i.e.,
extensionally). McBride presented a syntax and typing rules for the
system, as well as an erasure property that exploits the difference
between “not used” and “used”, but does not do anything with the
finer usage information available. In this paper, we fix and extend
McBride’s system, and present semantic interpretations that fully
exploit the usage information.
Contributions
1. Section 2 reformulates McBride’s system as Quantitative
Type Theory (QTT) to add dependent tensor products and
booleans, and to fix a bug in the original system that caused
substitution to be inadmissible.
2. Section 3 presents Quantitative Categories with Families , a
novel class of categorical models for interpreting QTT.
3. Section 4 presents several concrete realisability models of
QTT as instances of QCwFs. These demonstrate that QTT
allows resource sensitive interpretation of terms. Read con-
structively, these interpretations yield an efficient extraction
mechanism with precise control over resource usage.
2 Quantitative Type Theory
Combining dependency with linearity is not straightforward. We
motivate McBride’s solution and our formulation of it.
2.1 Dependency and Accountancy
In Martin-Löf Type Theory, the term judgement has the form:
x1 : S1, x2 : S2, . . . ,xn : Sn ⊢ M : T
From Type Theory’s mixed computational/logical point of view,
the context x1 : S1, x2 : S2, . . . ,xn : Sn has two uses. It describes
the names used for resources which may be used byM to construct
a resource of type T . It also describes the names used to refer to
the extensional meanings represented by those resources used to