  Talk at WoLLIC (Upenn, May 2011) by Vladimir Voevodsky

            Univalent Foundations are:
1. Foundations of mathematics which can be used both for
   constructive and for non-constructive mathematics.
2. Foundations which naturally include ”axiomatization” of
   the categorical and higher categorical thinking.
3. Foundations which can be conveniently formalized using
   the well known in computer science class of languages
   called Martin-Lof type systems.
4. Foundations which are based on direct axiomatization of
   the ”world” of homotopy types instead of the ”world” of
   sets.
                            1
                   A bit of history

1. Multiple attempts to use existing foundations (ZFC -
   Zermelo-Freankel theory with the Axiom of Choice) as
   the basis of formalization of mathematics in the language
   of proof assistants such as Coq all led to very unnatural
   constructions.
2. In 1996, Martin Hofmann and Thomas Streicher con-
   structed a new semantics for type theory which inter-
   preted types not as sets but as groupoids.
3. In 2005/2006 Steve Awodey and his students discovered
   the connection between the Martin-Lof identity types and
   factorization axioms of the abstract homotopy theory.
   This led to their interpretation as path spaces.
                             2
                 A bit of history (cont.)
4. At about the same time I introduced the idea of univalent
   fibrations and conjectured that there exists a semantics
   for Martin-Lof type systems which interprets universes as
   bases of the univalent fibrations.
5. In the fall of 2009 I understood how to combine the ideas
   of Steve Awodey with my ideas to obtain a far reach-
   ing generalization of the groupoid interpretation. It was
   eventually called the univalent model of Martin-Lof type
   theories.
6. In February 2010 I started to write a Coq library of math-
   ematical constructions based on the univalent model. See
   http://github.com/vladimirias/Foundations
                             3
                Some of the key ideas
1. Univalent model suggest a definition for the type of ”weak
   equivalences” between two types. These equivalences sat-
   isfy all the standard properties one would expect from
   equivalences between higher groupoids or homotopy types.
   Most of such properties have now been fromaly proved.
   All constructions written in the context of the univalent
   semantics are invariant under these equivalences.
2. Not all types are to be interpreted as sets. There is a
   filtration on type expressions by their ”h-levels”.
 (a) Types of h-level 0 are ”contractible” i.e. equivalent to
     the one point type.
 (b) Types of h-level 1 correspond to ”propositions”.
                             4
 (c) Types of h-level 2 correspond to sets.
 (d) Types of h-level 3 correspond to groupoids.
 (e) Types of higher levels correspond to higher groupoids
     or, equivalently, to more general homotopy types.
3. Types with decidable equality have level ≤ 2 e.g. the
   usual inductive types such as natural numbers, trees etc.
   are sets.
4. Typical examples of types of level > 2 are universes.
5. The univalent model satisfies a new axiom which is called
   the univalence axiom. It imposes the condition that the
   identity type between two types is naturally weakly equiv-
   alent to the type of weak equivalences between these
   types.
                             5
             Some of the key ideas (cont.)
6. The univalence axiom implies the functional extensional-
   ity both for ”straight” functions and for dependent func-
   tions. It also implies that two logically equivalent ”propo-
   sitions” (types of h-level 1) are equal.
7. The univalence axiom implies that the universe of types
   of h-level n has h-level n + 1. In particular, the type
   of ”propositions” is a ”set” and the type of ”sets” is a
   ”groupoid”.
8. The univalence axiom implies similar statements for types
   with structures e.g. one can prove using the univalence
   axiom that the identity type between two groups is equiv-
   alent to the type of isomorphisms between these groups.
                              6
            Some of the key ideas (cont.)
9. Unlike many other axioms (e.g. the axiom of excluded
   middle), the univalence axiom is expected ”to have com-
   putational content”. In other words computation/normalization
   should be extendable in a certain sense to terms which
   involve the univalence axiom. For example there is the
   following precise:
   Conjecture 1. There exists a terminating algorithm which
   for any term expression t of type nat constructed using
   the univalence axiom (in any way) returns a term expres-
   sion t1 of type nat which does not use univalence axiom
   (in any way) and a proof that t = t1 (which may use the
   univalence axiom).
                            7
          Current state of development.

1. The basic properties of weak equivalences, h-levels etc.
   have been formalized in Coq. These results do not de-
   pend on the univalence axiom. Some of the proofs require
   functional extensionality.
2. The current approach to the universe management in Coq
   is not flexible enough for many of the more advanced and
   interesting applications of the univalent approach. I am
   talking to the Coq development people about this issues.
   At the moment, in order not to stall the development of
   interesting mathematics I am using a patch provided by
   Hugo Herbelin which switches off the universe consistency
   verification in Coq.
                             8
3. Modulo the disclaimer of the previous paragraph we have
   been able to formalize a very important construction - the
   construction of true set-quotients of types. This opens the
   way for the formalization of many areas of mathematics
   which were unaccessible to direct type-theoretic formal-
   ization due to the usual problems with quotients in type
   theory.
4. There is a growing community of people working on the
   issues connected with the univalent foundations. There
   will be a full year program on this topic at the Institute
   for Advanced Study in 2012-2013 co-organized by Steve
   Awodey, Thierry Coquand and myself. For information
   on the program See http://www.math.ias.edu/sp/univalent
   .
                              9
