                  Sets in Types, Types in Sets


                                Benjamin Werner
                           INRIA{Ro quen ourt BP 105
                            78 153 LE CHESNAY edex
                                    FRANCE
                            benjamin.wernerinria.fr



      Abstra t.    We present two mutual en odings, respe tively of the Cal-
       ulus of Indu tive Constru tions in Zermelo-Frnkel set theory and the
      opposite way. More pre isely, we a tually onstru t two families of en-
       odings, relating the number of universes in the type theory with the
      number of ina essible ardinals in the set theory. The main result is that
      both hierar hies of logi al formalisms interleave w.r.t. expressive power
      and thus are essentially equivalent. Both en odings are quite elementary:
      type theory is interpreted in set theory through a generalization of Co-
      quand's simple proof-irrelevan e interpretation. Set theory is en oded in
      type theory using a variant of A zel's en oding; we have formally he ked
      this last part using the Coq proof assistant.


1 Introdu tion
This work is an attempt towards better understanding of the expressiveness of
powerful type theories. We here investigate the Cal ulus of Indu tive Constru -
tions (CIC); this formalism is, with some variants, the one implemented in the
proof systems Coq [6℄ and Lego. It is essentially a typed - al ulus with the
following features:
 { Dependent types, allowing the representation of propositions as types, through
   the Curry-Howard isomorphism.
 { An impredi ative level, i.e. the al ulus is an extension of Girard's system
   F , allowing polymorphi types and thus impredi ative reasoning.
 { A hierar hy of predi ative universes, quite similar to Martin-Lofs' [17℄.
 { Indu tive types, generalizing the primitive integers of Godel's system T .
     From the point of view of normalization and/or onsisten y proofs, the om-
bination of these di erent features is still not fully understood. Known normal-
ization proofs, as well as model onstru tions, make use of ina essible ardinals,
i.e. go beyond usual set theory. The question we try to address in the present
work is whether ina essible ardinals are ne essary to build a model of CIC,
or equivalently whether CIC is as strong as usual Zermelo-Frnkel set theory
(ZFC).
     In the next se tion we present CIC in a more formal way. In se tion 3 we
give an interpretation of CIC in ZFC; these semanti s generalize Coquand's
proof-irrelevan e semanti s and are extremely straightforward. The number of
ina essible ardinals needed is exa tly the number of universes of the modelized
type theory. In se tion 4, we do the reverse work by en oding ZFC in CIC,
adapting work of A zel [1{3℄. We however have to assume a type-theoreti al
axiom of hoi e in CIC to be able to en ode full ZFC. We then an en ode ZFC
with n ina essible ardinals in CIC equipped with n + 1 universes. This gives
lead to ni ely interleaving relative onsisten y proofs. The situation is summed
up in the on lusion.
    The paper paper tries to be as self- ontained as possible. For matters of
spa e, we keep our des ription of indu tive types informal, relying on examples
and referring to the relevant publi ations. Some basi notions of - al ulus and
set theory are required. The en oding of set theory in CIC is not extensively
des ribed but has been formally he ked on the Coq proof-assistant; the brave
reader an he k details looking at the proof- les [21℄.

2 De nition of the Type Theory
We give a presentation of the type theory in the style of Pure Type Systems
(PTS, see [5℄). We distinguish two parts: the rules dealing with the formation of
fun tion types, -abstra tion and appli ation on one hand, and indu tive types
on the other.

2.1 Fun tion types
The sorts of the al ulus are Prop and Typei where i is a stri tly positive integer;
we will generally use s to denote them:
                               s := Prop j Typei
We give ourselves a ountable set of variables, generally denoted by x; y; z; a; b, ,
X , et .
    The terms of the al ulus are des ribed by the following grammar:
                        t := x j (t t) j x : t:t j x : t:t
The rst three ases orrespond to the usual onstru tors for -terms: variable,
appli ation and typed abstra tion. The term x : A:B is the type of fun tions
mapping terms of type A to type B . The value x of the argument might o ur
in B sin e the al ulus allows dependent types. In the ase where x does not
o ur free in B , x : A:B an be written A ! B .
    We write t[x n u℄ for the term t in whi h the free o urren es of the variable
x are repla ed by u. The substitution being de ned the usual way. We write B
for the -redu tion whi h is de ned as the ontextual losure of:
                             (x : A:t u) ! t[x n u℄
The re exive, transitive and symmetri        losure of B is alled - onversion,
written = .
               (Prop) [℄ ` Prop : Type1         (Type i ) [℄ ` Typei : Typei+1

                                  ` A : Prop                      ` A : Typei
                (Cum-Prop)                         (Cum i )
                                  ` A : Typei                    ` A : Typei+1
                                    ` A : Prop        ; (x : A) ` B : Typej
                   (Pi-Prop j )
                                              ` x : A:B : Typej
                                ` A : Typei        ; (x : A) ` B : Typej
                     (Pi i;j )
                                       ` x : A:B : Typemax(i;j )
                                      ` A : Typei         ` P : Prop
                          (Impr)
                                            ` x : a:P : Prop
                                ; (x : A) ` t : B        ` x : A:B : s
                      (Lam)
                                         ` x : A:t : x : A:B
                           (App)      ` u : x : A:B           `v:A
                                            ` (u v ) : B [x n v ℄
                                     `u:A          `B:s           A= B
                        (Conv)
                                                  `u:B

                      Fig. 1.   Rules for the fun tional fragment of CIC


    The typing rules of the system are given for gure 1. They orrespond to
Luo's Extended Cal ulus of Constru tions1 des ribed in [16℄.
    A well-formed type is a term of type some sort in a given ontext. The sorts
Typei are alled the universes; they are hierar hally embedded in ea h other
through the umulativity rules Cumi . Universal quanti ation is represented by
the  -types. An important point is that in Prop, we an quantify over all uni-
verses (impredi ativity). In Typei however, quanti ation is restri ted to types
living below universe i, i.e. over terms of type Typej with j  i.

2.2 Indu tive types
Indu tive types are a very important extension to a type system meant to for-
malize a tual mathemati s. Among others, they are used to de ne data types
and logi al onne tives and they play an essential role in the present work.
Coquand and Paulin-Mohring [10℄ motivate this extension and give a formal
des ription of generi indu tive types. The Coq referen e manual [6℄ ontains a
des ription of the urrently implemented version of indu tive de nitions due to
Paulin-Mohring.
1   Luo's ECC also in ludes  -types whi h are a parti ular ase of the indu tive types des ribed
    below.
Notations An indu tive type is the smallest type losed by a list of onstru tors.
The most well-known example is maybe the de nition of unary integers:
                    Indu tive Nat : Type1 := O : Nat
                                           j S : Nat ! Nat:
    Whi h de nes three obje ts Nat, O and S of the given types. To ea h indu -
tive type are asso iated elimination s hemes orresponding to ase analysis and
stru tural re ursion and indu tion. In this ase the type of these s hemes is:

   P : Nat ! s:(P O) ! (n : Nat:(P n) ! (P (S n))) ! n : Nat:(P n)
with s ranging over the sorts Prop and Typei .
    The redu tion rules asso iated to these s hemes are de ned as usual, and in
this ase orrespond to the re ursor R of system T . In what follows however,
we will generally not mention the elimination s heme expli itly and rather use
a more expli it ML-like notation whi h, we believe is not ambiguous in the
 onstru tions treated below. For instan e:
                    De nition add : Nat ! Nat ! Nat :=
                        O n 7! n
                      j (S p) n 7! (S (add p n)):
   Of ourse, the orresponding new redu tion rules are taken into a ount by
the onversion rule Conv; for instan e (add (S O) (S O)) and (S (S O)) are
identi ed.

Restri tions Two main restri tions assure that indu tive de nitions do not
endanger the onsisten y of the system. The rst one is well-known and of syn-
ta ti al nature: re ursive arguments must o ur in stri tly positive position in
the type of onstru tors; see [10℄ for details. Typi aly the following de nition is
prohibited sin e the rst o urren e of foo in the type of C is negative:
Indu tive foo : Typei :=
  C : (foo ! foo) ! foo:
   Semanti ally, the positivity ondition ensures that the indu tive de nition
 orresponds to the least x-point of a monotone operator.
    The se ond restri tion is more interesting and essential to what follows. If
the indu tive type is of type Typei , then all arguments of its onstru tors must
live in the same universe or lower, i.e. using the umulativity rule, the arguments
of the onstru tors must be themselves of type Typei . Releasing this restri tion
would allow the onstru tion of paradoxes and break the onsisten y of the
system; see [8℄ for instan e. The ne essity for this restri tion will also appear
quite learly in the proof-irrelevan e interpretation and some of its onsequen es
are shown in the next paragraph.
Two de nitions of the existential An important point is that, in this paper,
we do not use indu tive de nitions of type Prop. Some propositions ertainly are
de ned indu tively, but they an be onstru ted using an impredi ative en oding.
The key example is the existential quanti ation. Given A : Typei and P : A ! s
we de ne the proposition 9a : A:(P a) as:
    Indu tive 9a : A:(P a) : Prop :=       9 i : (a : A)(P a) ! 9a : A:(P a):
   But this indu tive de nition is exa tly equivalent to:
       De nition 9a : A:(P a) := X : Prop:(a : A:(P a) ! X ) ! X:
    The important point is that there are no elimination rules of indu tive propo-
sitions towards Typei .
    There is however an alternative de nition for the existential quanti er, name-
ly the  -type living in Typei :
    Indu tive a : A:(P a) : Typei :=          : (a : A)(P a) ! 9a : A:(P a):
    Ea h of these two de nitions has it advantages and drawba ks. In the rst
 ase, the existential lives at the bottom of the universe hierar hy, and thus we
 an always quantify over it, wherever we are. On the other hand, we annot
extra t the witness of an existential proof: proving 9a : A:(P a) does not mean
that we an exhibit a term of type A.
    In the ase of the  -type, we are able to de ne  su h that ( ( a p)) B a.
But we annot onsider this  -type in types living lower in the hierar hy.
    We an noti e that if one does not use the impredi ative level in CIC, the
resulting theory is, in spirit, very lose to the one of Martin-Lof [17℄. The way we
view the impredi ative level in the present work is similar to Chur h's Higher-
Order Logi : the obje ts live in the predi ative levels, and Prop is used to express
properties about them; we annot however build obje ts out of proofs. This idea
is obvious in the proof-irrelevan e semanti s.

3 Proof-Irrelevan e Semanti s for CIC
3.1 General Idea
In this se tion, we will write 0 for the empty set, and 1 for the anoni al singleton
f0g.
     Sin e Reynolds [19℄, it is well-known that \polymorphism is not set-theoreti ",
i.e. it is not possible to interpret impredi ative types (here of type Prop) by set-
s. This will however be possible for the predi ative fragment of our theory, in
whi h the obje ts live. The proof-irrelevan e semanti s are an interpretation of
the type theory in lassi al set theory following two simple ideas:
 { Propositions are interpreted either by the empty set or by a anoni al s-
    ingleton, depending upon their validity in the model. As a onsequen e all
    proof-terms are identi ed. In the same way, the interpretation of Prop is
    f0; 1g.
 { On the predi ative level, types are simply interpreted as sets. In parti ular
   the fun tion type x : A:B is interpreted by the full set of set-theoreti
   fun tion between the interpretations of A and B .
    The ideas of these interpretation are very ommon. They an be found, for
instan e, in [9,11,13℄.
    We will all A(i) the interpretation of Typei . From the se ond assertion above
and the typing rule Pii;i we need the following losure ondition:
                            8A; B 2 A(i):BA 2 A(i):
In parti ular this implies that 2A 2 A(i), sin e jPropj = f0; 1g 2 A(i). It is
a tually not too diÆ ult to he k that the existen e of a set A(i) verifying the
( rst) losure ondition above implies the existen e of an ina essible ardinal.

3.2 Ina essible ardinals
In what follows, we will assume the existen e of an ina essible ardinal to build
the interpretation of ea h universe. The notions of set theory used are quite
 ommon (see [14,15℄ for instan e).
De nition 1 (Ina essible ardinal). An in nite ardinal  is said to be i-
na essible if and only if:
 { For any ardinal < , 2 < .
 { Let ( i )i2I be a family of ardinals <  indexed by a ardinal I < ; then
   supi2i ( i ) < .
    The main idea behind the notion of ina essible ardinal is that its existen e
allows the onstru tion of a set whi h is a itself a model of ZFC. It therefore
enhan es the expressive power of the theory. The following onstru tions are
usual in the literature.
    We write P for the powerset.

De nition 2. For every ordinal , we de ne a set V by indu tion over :
 { V0  0S
 { V  < P (V ) if > 0.
The following result is a onsequen e of the foundation axiom and the proofs
are well-known.
De nition 3 (Rank of a set). For every set X , there exists a smallest ordinal
 su h that X 2 V . is alled the rank of X , written rk(X ).

Lemma 4. If  is an ina essible ardinal, then V veri es the axioms of ZFC.
In parti ular if A 2 V and for every a 2 A, Ba 2 V , then a2A BA 2 V .
3.3 The Interpretation
From here on, we assume the existen e of an in reasing sequen e of ina essible
 ardinals (i )i2N . For every i we de ne A(i)  Vi .
    We an now de ne the interpretation. The interpretation j j of a ontext
   of length n is a set of n-tuples. The interpretation j ` tj of a judgement
   ` t : T does not depend upon T and is a fun tion of domain j j.
    As often for similar onstru tions, [4,18℄ among others, we rst de ne the
interpretation as a partial fun tion. The de nition is a stru tural indu tion over
the syntax; here, P ex lusively denotes propositions ( lauses 3 and 4):


                           j[℄j  1                                                  (1)
                  j ; (x : A)j  f( ; ); 2 j j ^ 2 j ` Aj( )g                        (2)

           j ` pj( )  0 if p is a proof in                           (3)
    j ` x : A:P j( )  1 if 8 2 j ` Aj( ):j ; (x : A) ` P j( ; ) = 1 (4)
    j ` x : A:P j( )  0 if 9 2 j ` Aj( ):j ; (x : A) ` P j( ; ) = 0 (5)
    j ` x : A:T j( )   2j `Aj j ; (x : A) ` T j( ; )
                                        ( )                           (6)
        j ` Propj( )  f0; 1g                                         (7)
       j ` Typei j( )  A(i)                                          (8)
     j ` x : A:B j( )  a 2 jAjI 7! jB jI x a  ;                     (9)
        j ` (u v)j( )  juj( )(jvj( ))                               (10)
           j ` xj( )  i                                             (11)

Interpretation of indu tive types The interpretation of ea h indu tive type
is de ned indu tively, in the set-theoreti al sense. Again, we avoid detailing a
tedious generi de nitions and on entrate on an example; onsider the de nition
of lists:
                Indu tive list : Typei := nil : list
                                        j ons : A ! list ! list:
where A : Typei . We en ode the onstru tor using set-theoreti al natural num-
bers 0,1,2. . . . The set jlistj is (if it exists) the smallest subset of A(i) verifying:
 { 0 2 jlistj
 { if a 2 jAj and l 2 jlistj, then (1; a; l) 2 jlistj.
    The two lauses orrespond to the two onstru tors; the interpretation of the
latter is natural:

 { jnilj  0
 { j( ons a l)j  (1; jaj; jlj) or, to be pre ise, the ( urry ed) fun tion whi h to
   a 2 jAj and l 2 jlistj asso iates (1; a; l).
    Note that we deliberately omit the interpretation of the ontext in this ex-
ample, sin e they do not play a relevant role and would ompli ate notations.
This interpretation generalizes smoothly to de nitions with arbitrary many on-
stru tors of arbitrary arity2 .
    The stri t positivity ondition assures that the indu tive de nition above
 orresponds to a monotone operator over sets. Sin e the arguments of the on-
stru tor are all of type Typei , the soundness result below will ensure that their
respe tive interpretations are elements of A(i) and thus this monotone operator
will a tually admit a least x-point in A(i).
    The stru tural ordering of the elements of the indu tive type is re e ted
by a well-founded ordering of its interpretation. This gives rise to a natural
interpretation of the elimination s hemes we do not detail here.

Soundness results We show our interpretation is de ned and sound on well-
formed judgements. In order to treat the onversion rule, we rst have to he k
that the interpretation is stable by redu tion. For matters of spa e we do not
detail the parts of the proof dealing with indu tive types and the orresponding
redu tions.
Lemma 5 (Substitution). Let ; (x : A);  ` t : T and ` a : A be two
derivable judgements. If 2 j j, 2 j ` Aj( ), = j ` aj( ), ( ; ; Æ ) 2
j ; (x : A); j and j ; (x : A);  ` tj( ; ; Æ) is de ned, then so is j ; [x n a℄ `
t[x n a℄j( ; Æ) and
            j ; [x n a℄ ` t[x n a℄j( ; Æ) = j ; (x : A);  ` tj( ; ; Æ):
By indu tion over the proof that j ; (x : A);  ` tj( ; ; Æ ) is de ned.
Lemma 6 (Subje t redu tion). Let ` u : U be a derivable judgement. If
j j is de ned and j ` uj( ) is de ned for any in j j, if u B u0 , then
                             j ` u0 j( ) = j ` uj( )
and in parti ular, the left-hand part of the equation is de ned.
By indu tion over the proof that j ` uj( ) is de ned (whi h follows the stru -
ture of u). The key ase where u is the redu ed redex is treated by the previous
lemma.
Corollary 7. Let ` u : U and ` u0 : U 0 be two derivable judgements su h
that j ` u : U j( ) and j ` u0 : U j( ) are de ned for 2 j j. Then
                           j ` u0 j( ) = j ` uj( ):
Immediate, by the previous lemma, subje t redu tion and on uen e of B .
2   Note however that we take advantage of the fa t that every onstru tor awaits a xed number
    of arguments, whi h is always trues in CIC.
Theorem 8 (Soundness). Let                  ` t : T be a derivable judgement. Then j j
is de ned, and for any element            of j j:
                                   j ` tj( ) 2 j ` T j( )
in parti ular, both obje ts are de ned.
By indu tion over the stru ture of the derivation. The previous orollary takes
 are of the onversion rule.
Corollary 9. There is no derivation of [℄ `  : Prop: .
De nition 10. A well-formed ontext                  is said to be onsistent if and only if
j j is not empty.
Remark 11. If a ontext             is onsistent, there is no derivation of            `       :
Prop: .
De nition 12. We all Type-theoreti al Des ription Axiom on level i (TTDAi ),
the following proposition:
     A; B : Typei :P : A ! B ! Prop:(a : A:9b : B:(P a b)) !
                                        9f : A ! B:(a : A:(P a (f a)))
Theorem 13. The following ontext built up from instan es of TTDAi and the
ex luded middle is onsistent:
      (e : P : Prop:P _ :P ); (a1 : TTDA1 ); (a2 : TTDA2 ); : : : ; (an : TTDAn )
It is obvious that jP : Prop:P _:P j = 1. One easily he ks that jTTDAi j = 1 is
equivalent to the usual set-theoreti al axiom of hoi e; it is thus onsidered true,
sin e we work in ZFC3 . The following alternative type-theoreti formulation of
the hoi e axiom will also be useful.
De nition 14. We all Type-theoreti al Choi e Axiom on the level i (TTCAi ),
the following proposition:
A : Typei :R : A ! A ! Prop:(equiv A R) !
                          9f : A ! A:x; y : A:(R x y) ! (f x) =A (f y)
where (equiv A R) expresses that R is an equivalen e relation over A, namely:
equiv := A : Typei :R : A ! A ! Prop:
                                  ((x : A)(R x x))
                                ^ ((x; y : A)(R x y) ! (R y x))
                                ^ ((x; y; z : A)(R x y) ! (R y z ) ! (R x z ))
3   To be pre ise, the interpretation of TTDAi is equivalent to the axiom of hoi e restri ted to
    the elements of A(i); it is however an easy and usual result that the latter is a onsequen e
    of the general set-theoreti al axiom of hoi e.
Again, one easily he ks that jT T CAi j = 1 is a onsequen e of the axiom of
 hoi e. We might thus on lude:
Theorem 15. The following ontext built up from instan es of TTDAi , TTCAi
and the ex luded middle is onsistent:
   (e : P : Prop:P _ :P ); (a1 : TTDA1 ); (a2 : TTDA2 ); : : : ; (an : TTDAn );
                            (a1 : TTCA1 ); (a2 : TTCA2 ); : : : ; (an : TTCAn :
    Let us write CICi for the fragment of CIC where we only use universes up to
Typei , and ZFCi for ZFC equipped with i ina essible ardinals. We an remark
that we an build the interpretation for CICi using only i 1 ina essibles; whi h
allows us to state a ner version of the theorem:
Theorem 16. If ZFCi 1 is onsistent, then so is the following ontext of CICi :
   (e : P : Prop:P _ :P ); (a1 : TTDA1 ); (a2 : TTDA2 ); : : : ; (an : TTDAn );
                            (a1 : TTCA1 ); (a2 : TTCA2 ); : : : ; (an : TTCAn :

3.4 Comment
The type-theoreti al des ription axiom is valid in the model be ause the set-
theoreti al axiom of hoi e is valid in ZFC, but also, and mainly, be ause the
fun tion type x : A:B is interpreted by the full spa e of set-theoreti al fun -
tions. A tually we might view the hypothesis TTDA as a way to express, in the
type theory, that the model is full. In the next se tion we develop this point by
showing that TTDA is a tually a suÆ ient onstraint to for e the model to be
full, sin e adding TTDA to the type theory allows to en ode full ZF.
    It is ertainly not obvious how to build a model for the Cal ulus of Indu tive
Constru tions whi h would not be full (and not require the existen e of ina es-
sibles). A tually, it is, to our knowledge, an open problem whether this is at all
possible.
    We should also say a word about the link with normalization proofs. Al-
tenkir h [4℄ has presented a new te hnique in whi h proving normalization for
a type theory essentially boils down to the onstru tion of a ertain kind of
model. This idea has been used by Mellies and Werner in a normalization proof
for Pure Type Systems [18℄. Sin e, in the latter work, indu tive types where not
 onsidered, it was possible to avoid using ina essibles at the ost of a notable
 ompli ation of the model onstru tion. We mention this be ause su h normal-
ization proofs an be parti ularly well be built up along the proof-irrelevan e
interpretation. For matters of spa e, and sin e this is not the primary topi of
the present paper, we do not deal further with normalization here.

4 En oding ZFC in CIC
In this se tion, we present an adaptation of Peter A zel's en oding of set theory
in type theory. We have formalized and he ked our version of the en oding using
the Coq theorem prover[21℄.
    Before des ribing the te hni al di eren es with A zel's original work, we
should mention the di erent motivations that drive us here. A zel uses Martin-
Lof predi ative type theory; he wanted to demonstrate the pertinen e this the-
ory as a foundational formalism and was mainly interested in onstru tivity.
It was therefore mu h more important to him to obtain a onstru tive type
theory than to study the links with the usual lassi al (and impredi ative and
non- onstru tive) Zermelo-Frnkel set theory. Here, we are more primitively
interested in \brute for e" expressive power and impredi ativity.
    We parametrize our development by a universe index i. The reader might
  nd more details in the Coq proof- le [21℄ and A zel's original work [1{3℄.

4.1 The sets
Peter A zel's en oding is a beautyful and very re ned pie e of type theory. The
main idea is that sets an be build up indu tively following the foundation axiom:
the elements are stru turally smaller than the set whi h ontains them.
                          Indu tive Set : Typei+1 :=
                            sup : A : Typei :(A ! Set) ! Set:
    Intuitively (sup A f ) is the set whose elements are the obje ts of the form
(f a) where a ranges over the type A; mixing type and set theory notations
we ould write it ff (a); a : Ag. Note that (sup A f ) ontains at most as many
elements as the type A (less if, for instan e, f is a onstant fun tion).
    A good rst example is the onstru tion of the pair-set, orresponding to the
set-theoreti al axiom of pairing. Sin e the set fE; E 0 g has atmost two elements,
the obvious hoi e is to use the booleans as base type:
                      De nition Pair : Set ! Set ! Set :=
                       fun E1 E2 7! (sup bool (fun true 7! E1
                                                      j false 7! E )):
                                                                   2


     Another one is the empty set, whi h uses the empty type4 :
                    De nition Empty := (sup bot fun : bot ! Set):

4.2 The propositions
Before we an prove the de nitions above a tually verify the orresponding set-
theoreti axioms, we have to de ide how to translate the propositions of set
theory. Set theory is a rst order theory with two (binary) predi ates: member-
ship and equality. One rst de nes equality, by stru tural re ursion, in a way
whi h aptures the extentionality axiom:
           De nition Eq : Set ! Set ! Prop :=
            fun (sup A f ) (sup B g) 7! ((a : A:9b : B:(Eq (f a) (g b)))
                                       ^ (b : B:9a : A:(Eq (f a) (g b))))
4   The empty type bot is the indu tive type with no onstru tor.
   On top of this, one easily de nes membership:

                    De nition In : Set ! Set ! Prop :=
                     fun E (sup A f ) 7! 9a : A:(Eq E (f a)):

    It is in these two last de nitions that we made a hoi e di erent from A zel's:
we hose to represent the propositions of set theory by obje ts of type Prop as
opposed to A zel who translates propositions to obje ts either of type Typei or
of type Typei+1 .
    In any ase, given the two de nitions above, we an he k the onstru tion of
the unordered pair a tually is a witness of the orresponding axiom of Zermelo
set theory by proving the three following lemmas:

             (A; B : Set)(In A (Pair A B )
             (A; B : Set)(In B (Pair A B )
             (A; B; C : Set)(In C (Pair A B ) ! (Eq A C ) _ (Eq B C )

  Note that equality over sets is not represented by the usual Leibniz equality.
Thus, we have to prove that all our en odings are extentional. For example:

              A; A0 ; B : Set:(In A B ) ! (Eq A A0 ) ! (In A0 B ):


4.3 Comparing the two approa hes

From a onstru tive point of view, the main drawba k of our en oding is that,
sin e we annot extra t the existential witness of existential proofs, it is to prove
9X : Set:(P X ) and to a tually exhibit a term E of type Set together with a
proof of (P E ). A side e e t is the diÆ ulty we have proving the repla ement
s hemata as des ribed in se tion 4.5.
    The advantage is that, as opposed to A zel, we gain unbounded quanti a-
tion (over all sets) thanks to impredi ativity and avoid umbersome distin tions
between restri ted and unrestri ted formulas, leading to various formulations of
the omprehension s heme.
    We should however remark that in many ases, we an avoid relying on the
usual repla ement s heme, using the higher-order features of CIC instead.


4.4 The other omputational onstru tions

The other onstru tions underlying the set theory Z, namely union, omprehen-
sion s heme and the powerset an then be de ned without diÆ ulty. Possible
de nitions are:
              De nition Power : Set ! Set ! Set :=
               fun E 7! (sup (Set ! Prop)
                             P : Set ! Prop:(Compr P E )):
              De nition Union : Set ! Set :=
               fun (sup A f ) 7! (sup a : A:(1 (f a))
                                      fun( a b) 7! (2 (f a) b)):
              De nition Comp : Set ! (Set ! Prop) ! Set :=
               fun (sup A f ) 7! (sup a : A:(P (f a))
                                      fun( a p) 7! (f a)):
   From there we an, for instan e, de ne the interse tion set in the usual way:
      De nition Inter : Set ! Set :=
       fun E 7! (Comp (Union E ) e : Set:a : Set:(In a E ) ! (In e a)):
Of ourse, one then has to he k the usual properties for all these onstru tions.
   A very ni e onstru tion is the set of natural numbers, orresponding to the
axiom of in nity, obtained using the type of natural numbers:
                  De nition en : Nat ! Set :=
                      O 7! Empty
                   (S n) 7! (Union (Pair (en n) (Power (en n)))):
               De nition NAT := (sup Nat en ):
   All these de nitions are basi ally A zel's ones, ex ept the powerset whi h
obviously strongly relies on impredi ativity. A rst onsequen e is:
Theorem 17. The set theory Z an be en oded in CCI2 +EM.

4.5 Non- omputational onstru tions: repla ement and hoi e
The situation is more ompli ated regarding the repla ement s hemata and the
(set theoreti al) axiom of hoi e. Both axioms rely on assumptions of the form
8A:9B: : : :. Sin e we work with a non- omputational existential quanti er, we
have no han e to a tually build a set out of this assumption. We an however
prove, using TTDA, the set theoreti al axiom. The proofs are quite straightfor-
ward but too long to be detailed here; we refer to the proof- le [21℄ for details.

Formulations of the repla ement s hemata The en oding of the following
 olle tion s heme an be proven in CIC, assuming TTDA. It is parametrized by
a binary predi ate P :
   (8X : 9Y : P (X; Y )) ) 8E : 9A : (8x 2 E : 9y 2 A : P (x; y )):
Furthermore, suppose P is a fun tional predi ate, namely
   8x; y; y0 : P (x; y) ^ P (x; y0 ) ) y = y0 :
Then, assuming TTDA and the ex luded middle, we an prove the usual repla e-
ment s hemata:
   8X : 9Y : 8y : (y 2 Y () 9x 2 X : P (x; y)):
   We an then state:
Theorem 18. The set theory ZF an be en oded in CCI2 +EM+TTDA3 .
A possible en oding of the axiom of hoi e Let us, for instan e, onsider
the following formulation of the set-theoreti al axiom of hoi e:
   Let E be set su h that:
    { all elements of E are non-empty (i.e. bear one element)
    { the interse tion of two elements of E is non-empty
   Then there exists a set X su h that the interse tion of X with any ele-
   ment of E bears exa tly one element.
Viewing this statement in the en oding, we may onsider E is of the form
(sup A f ). Using TTDA, we an prove the existen e of a fun tion g of type
A ! Set, su h that for any inhabitant a of type A, we have (In (g a) (f a)).
Suppose however that a and b are two di erent inhabitants of A, su h that
(Eq (f a) (f b)); we annot on lude that (Eq (g a) (g b)). The set (sup A g ) is
therefore not an adequate witness for the axiom of hoi e: its interse tion with
the element (f a) of E might possibly bear several elements (here (g a) and
(g b)). We have to further assume TTCA, to deal orre tly with this extention-
ality problem and prove the lemma above. The on lusion then is:
Theorem 19. The set theory ZFC an be en oded in CCI3 using the assump-
tions EM+TTDA3 TTCA3 .

4.6 Ina essible Cardinals
Up to here, we have only used two universes Typei and Typei+1 . As a onse-
quen e CIC2 (with axioms) is suÆ ient to en ode ZFC. We now show that we
are able to build expli it en odings for ina essible ardinals.
    The idea is remarkably simple and builds on the only typing rule we have
not used so far, namely umulativity. We dupli ate the whole en oding in a new
universe; for simpli ity of notations we suppose that i is at least 2 and rede ne
sets one level below:
                    Indu tive Set0 : Typei :=
                      sup0 : A : Typei 1 :(A ! Set0 ) ! Set0 :
    The new type Set0 then orresponds to A(1), the set of \small sets" whi h
is obviously losed for all set-theoreti al axioms. Indeed we have an obvious
inje tion from Set0 to Set:
                  De nition inj : Set0 ! Set :=
                   fun (sup0 A f ) 7! (sup A a : A:(inj (f a))):
And we an a tually de ne the big set of small sets:
                                 Big := (sup Set0 inj ):
And, for instan e, it is surprisingly simple to prove that Big is losed for the
powerset:
                  E : Set:(In E Big) ! (In (Power E ) Big):
Of ourse this dupli ation of the en oding an be repeated several times using
several universes.
    At the urrent day, we have not expli itly proven in Coq the set Big implies
the existen e of an ina essible ardinal. The main reason is that this would
imply developing the whole theory of ordinals in ZFC en oded in Coq. Pre isely,
su h a development is under way, along the lines of Paul Taylor's de nition of
 onstru tive ordinals [20℄. It seems however reasonable to anti ipate the formal
result of proving the existen e of ina essible ordinals in Coq, whi h is our nal
relative onsisten y result:
Theorem 20. The set theory ZFC with n ina essible ardinals an be en oded
in
CICn+2 +EM+TTDAn+2 .

5 Con lusion
Building on ideas of A zel, Coquand and others, we have presented two families
of relative onsisten y proofs between ZFC and CIC, depending on how many
ina essible ardinals (resp. universes) we assume. This shows these two families
have interleaving logi al strengths; the situation is summed up in the following
  gure.
                        ZFCi+1                         CICi+2


                        ZFCi                           CICi+1



                        ZFC2                           CIC3


                        ZFC1                           CIC2



                        ZFC0                           CIC1


Both proofs are quite simple in spirit, and even the details are still mu h less
 umbersome than what metatheoreti al reasoning an often be.
    Some work remains to be done. The formal proof of the existen e of ina es-
sible ardinals of ourse, but also we believe the axioms used in oq in order to
en ode ZF and ZFC might be slightly simpli ed. To be pre ise, we onje ture:
1. When en oding ZF in CIC, it should be possible to rely on a weaker (but
   possibly more verbose) axiom than TTDA, whose justi ation unpleasantly
   relies on the set-theoreti axiom of hoi e.
2. Along the lines of the Dia ones u-Goodman-Myhill paradox, it should be
   possible to prove the ex luded middle in CIC under the assumptions TTDA
   and TTCA.
More generally, it remains an open problem, up-to-where hoi e axioms are ne -
essary for CIC to a hieve the expressiveness of ZF or ZFC 5 .
    This work does not give birth to fundamental new on epts. We hope however
it helps to bring various pie es of mathemati s together. Espe ially we believe it
sheds some new lights on the on ept of type universes, whi h are often diÆ ult
to grasp.

A knowledgements
I am grateful to Peter A zel, Thierry Coquand and Samuel La as for helpful
ex hanges on the topi . The idea of investigating this topi was given to me by
Christine Paulin-Mohring and Martin Ho man.

Referen es
  1. P. A zel. The Type Theoreti Interpretation of Constru tive Set Theory. Logi
     Colloquium 77, Ma intyre, Pa holsky and Paris (editors), Springer, 1977.
  2. P. A zel. The Type Theoreti Interpretation of Constru tive Set Theory: Choi e
     Prin iples. In The L. E. J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium, A. S. Troelstra and
     D. van Dalen (editors), North-Holland, 1982.
  3. P. A zel. The Type Theoreti Interpretation of Constru tive Set Theory: Indu -
     tive De nitions. Pro eedings of Methodology and Philosophy of S ien es, 1985.
  4. T. Altenkir h. Constru tions, Indu tive Types and Strong Normalization. Ph.D.
     Thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1993.
  5. H. Barendregt. Lambda Cal uli with Types. In Handbook of Logi in Computer
     S ien e, Vol II, Elsevier, 1992
  6. B. Barras et al. The Coq Proof Assistant Referen e Manual, Version 6.1. INRIA
     Te hni al Report, 1996.
  7. A. Chur h. A Formulation of the Simple Theory of Types. Journal of Symboli
     Logi , 5 (1), pp. 56-68, 1940.
  8. T. Coquand. An Analysis of Girard's Paradox. Pro eeding of LICS, IEEE press,
     1985.
  9. T. Coquand. Metamathemati al Investigations of a Cal ulus of Constru tions.
     In P. Oddifredi (editor), Logi and Computer S ien e. A ademi Press, 1990.
     Rapport de re her he INRIA 1088.
 10. T. Coquand and C. Paulin-Mohring. Indu tively de ned types. In P. Martin-Lof
     et G. Mints (editors), Pro eedings of Colog'88. Springer-Verlag, LNCS 417, 1990.
 11. P. Dybjer. Indu tive sets and families in Martin-Lof's type theory and their set-
     theoreti semanti s. In G. Huet and G. Plotkin (editors), Logi al Frameworks,
     Cambridge University Press, 1991.
 12. J.-Y. Girard. Interpretation fon tionnelle et elimination des oupures de
     l'arithmetique d'ordre superieur, These d'Etat, Universite Paris 7, 1972.
5   Or alternatively whether one an exhibit a relative onsisten y proof of CIC+TTDA+TTCA
    in CIC.
13. D. Howe. On Computational Open-Endedness in Martin-Lof's Type Theory. Pro-
     eedings of LICS, 1991.
14. J.-L. Krivine. Theorie Axiomatique des Ensembles, Presses Universitaires de
    Fran e, 1969.
15. K. Kunen. Set Theory, An Introdu tion { Independen e Proofs, North-Holland,
    1980.
16. Z. Luo. An Extended Cal ulus of Constru tions. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Ed-
    inburgh, 1990.
17. P. Martin-Lof. Intuitionisti Type Theory. Studies in Proof Theory, Bibliopolis,
    1984.
18. P.-A. Mellies and B. Werner. A Generi Normalization Proof for Pure Type Sys-
    tems. Submitted and vailable on http://pauilla .inria.fr/~werner/, 1996.
19. J. C. Reynolds. Polymorphism is not Set-theoreti . Pro eedings Int. Symp. on
    Semanti s of Data Types, Sophia-Antipolis, LNCS 173, Springer, 1984.
20. P. Taylor. Intuitionisti Sets and Ordinals. Journal of symboli Logi , 61(3), pp.
    705-744, 1996.
21. B. Werner. An En oding of ZFC Set Theory in Coq. Coq proof- le, available on
    http://pauilla .inria.fr/ werner/ or as part of Coq distribution, 1997.
