                                           Voevodsky’s Univalence Axiom in homotopy type




arXiv:1302.4731v1 [math.HO] 19 Feb 2013
                                                               theory

                                                   Steve Awodey, Álvaro Pelayo and Michael A. Warren


                                                                               Abstract
                                                    In this short note we give a glimpse of homotopy type theory, a
                                                new field of mathematics at the intersection of algebraic topology and
                                                mathematical logic, and we explain Vladimir Voevodsky’s univalent
                                                interpretation of it. This interpretation has given rise to the univalent
                                                foundations program, which is the topic of the current special year at
                                                the Institute for Advanced Study.

                                              The Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton is hosting a special pro-
                                          gram during the academic year 2012-2013 on a new research theme that
                                          is based on recently discovered connections between homotopy theory, a
                                          branch of algebraic topology, and type theory, a branch of mathematical
                                          logic and theoretical computer science. In this brief paper our goal is to
                                          take a glance at these developments. For those readers who would like to
                                          learn more about them, we recommend a number of references throughout.
                                              Type theory was invented by Bertrand Russell [20], but it was first
                                          developed as a rigorous formal system by Alonzo Church [3, 4, 5]. It now
                                          has numerous applications in computer science, especially in the theory of
                                          programming languages [19]. Per Martin-Löf [15, 11, 13, 14], among others,
                                          developed a generalization of Church’s system which is now usually called
                                          dependent, constructive, or simply Martin-Löf type theory; this is the
                                          system that we consider here. It was originally intended as a rigorous frame-
                                          work for constructive mathematics.
                                              In type theory objects are classified using a primitive notion of type, sim-
                                          ilar to the data-types used in programming languages. And as in program-
                                          ming languages, these elaborately structured types can be used to express
                                          detailed specifications of the objects classified, giving rise to principles of
                                          reasoning about them. To take a simple example, the objects of a product
                                          type A × B are known to be of the form ha, bi, and so one automatically
                                          knows how to form them and how to decompose them. This aspect of type

                                                                                   1
theory has led to its extensive use in verifying the correctness of computer
programs. Type theories also form the basis of modern computer proof
assistants, which are used for formalizing mathematics and verifying the
correctness of formalized proofs. For example, the powerful Coq proof as-
sistant [6] has recently been used to formalize and verify the correctness of
the proof of the celebrated Feit-Thompson Odd-Order theorem [7].
    One problem with understanding type theory from a mathematical point
of view, however, has always been that the basic concept of type is unlike
that of set in ways that have been hard to make precise. This difficulty has
now been solved by the idea of regarding types, not as strange sets (perhaps
constructed without using classical logic), but as spaces, regarded from the
perspective of homotopy theory
    In homotopy theory one is concerned with spaces and continuous map-
pings between them, up to homotopy; a homotopy between a pair of contin-
uous maps f : X → Y and g : X → Y is a continuous map H : X ×[0, 1] → Y
satisfying H(x, 0) = f (x) and H(x, 1) = g(x). The homotopy H may be
thought of as a “continuous deformation” of f into g. The spaces X and Y
are said to be homotopy equivalent, X ≃ Y , if there are continuous maps
going back and forth, the composites of which are homotopical to the re-
spective identity mappings, i.e. if they are isomorphic “up to homotopy”.
Homotopy equivalent spaces have the same algebraic invariants (e.g. homol-
ogy, or the fundamental group), and are said to have the same homotopy
type.
    Homotopy type theory is a new field of mathematics which interprets
type theory from a homotopical perspective. In homotopy type theory, one
regards the types as spaces, or homotopy types, and the logical constructions
(such as the product A × B) as homotopy-invariant constructions on spaces.
In this way, one is able to manipulate spaces directly, without first having
to develop point-set topology or even define the real numbers. Homotopy
type theory is connected to several topics of interest in modern algebraic
topology, such as ∞-groupoids and Quillen model structures (see [18]); we
will only mention one simple example below, namely the homotopy groups
of spheres.
    To briefly explain the homotopical perspective of types, consider the
basic concept of type theory, namely that the term a is of type A, which is
written:
                                    a : A.
This expression is traditionally thought of as akin to “a is an element of the
set A.” However, in homotopy type theory we think of it instead as “a is


                                      2
a point of the space A.” Similarly, every term f : A → B is regarded as a
continuous function from the space A to the space B.
     This perspective clarifies features of type theory which were puzzling
from the perspective of types as sets; for instance, that one can have non-
trivial types X such that (X → X) ∼    = X + 1. But the key new idea of the
homotopy interpretation is that the logical notion of identity a = b of two
objects a, b : A of the same type A can be understood as the existence of a
path p : a     b from point a to point b in the space A. This also means that
two functions f, g : A → B are identical just in case they are homotopic,
since a homotopy is just a family of paths px : f (x)      g(x) in B, one for
each x : A. In type theory, for every type A there is a (formerly somewhat
mysterious) type IdA of identities between objects of A; in homotopy type
theory, this is just the path space AI of all continuous maps I → A from the
unit interval. (See [2, 1, 18].)
     At around the same time that Awodey and Warren advanced the idea of
homotopy type theory, Voevodsky showed how to model type theory using
Kan simplicial sets, a familiar setting for classical homotopy theory, thus
arriving independently at essentially the same idea around 2005. Both were
inspired by the prior work of Hofmann and Streicher, who had constructed
a model of type theory using groupoids [9].
     Voevodsky moreover recognized that this simplicial interpretation sat-
isfies a further crucial property, which he termed univalence, and which is
not usually assumed in type theory. Adding univalence to type theory in
the form of a new axiom has far-reaching consequences, many of which are
natural, simplifying and compelling. The Univalence Axiom thus fur-
ther strengthens the homotopical view of type theory, since it holds in the
simplicial model, but fails in the view of types as sets.
     The basic idea of the Univalence Axiom can be explained as follows. In
type theory, one can have a universe U , the terms of which are themselves
types, A : U , etc. Of course, we do not have U : U , so only some types are
terms of U – call these the small types. Like any type, U has an identity
type IdU , which expresses the identity relation A = B among small types.
Thinking of types as spaces, U is a space, the points of which are spaces; to
understand its identity type, we must ask, what is a path p : A        B be-
tween spaces in U ? The Univalence Axiom says that such paths correspond
to homotopy equivalences A ≃ B, as explained above (the actual notion of
equivalence required is slightly different). A bit more precisely, given any
(small) types A and B, in addition to the type IdU (A, B) of identities be-
tween A and B there is the type Eq(A, B) of equivalences from A to B.
Since the identity map on any object is an equivalence, there is a canonical

                                     3
map,
                           IdU (A, B) → Eq(A, B).
The Univalence Axiom states that this map is itself an equivalence. At the
risk of oversimplifying, we can state this succinctly as follows:

Univalence Axiom (A = B) ≃ (A ≃ B).

In other words, identity is equivalent to equivalence.
     From the homotopical point of view, this says that the universe U is
something like a classifying space for (small) homotopy types, which is a
practical and natural assumption. From the logical point of view, however,
it is revolutionary: it says that isomorphic things can be identified! Mathe-
maticians are of course used to identifying isomorphic structures in practice,
but they generally do so with a wink, knowing that the identification is not
“officially” justified by foundations. But in this new foundational scheme,
not only are such structures formally identified, but the different ways in
which such identifications may be made themselves form a structure that
one can (and should!) take into account.
     Part of the appeal of homotopy type theory with the Univalence Axiom
is the many interesting connections it reveals between logic and homotopy.
Another remarkable aspect is that it can be carried out in a computer
proof assistant, since type theory exhibits such good computational prop-
erties (see [21, 8] on the use of computer proof assistants in general). In
practical terms, this means that it is possible to use the powerful, currently
available proof assistants based on type theory, like the Coq system, to de-
velop mathematics involving homotopy theory, to verify the correctness of
proofs, and even to provide some degree of automation of proofs.
     To give just one example, in homotopy type theory one can directly
define the n-dimensional sphere S n as a type, with its associated principles
of reasoning. Moreover, for any type A one can define the homotopy groups
πn (A), again in a very direct way in terms of the identity type IdA explained
above. One can then reason directly in type theory, using the principles
associated with these constructions, and prove for example that πn (S n ) = Z
for n ≥ 1 (as has recently been done by G. Brunerie and D. Licata at the
Institute for Advanced Study, using the Univalence Axiom in an essential
way). Finally, the proof can be formalized in a proof assistant and verified by
a computer. In this way, one not only has new methods of proof in classical
homotopy theory, but indeed ones which provide associated computational
tools.


                                      4
    Voevodsky has christened this combination of homotopy type theory
with the Univalence Axiom, implemented on a computer proof assistant, the
Univalent Foundations program. It can be regarded as a new foundation
for mathematics in general, not just for homotopy theory, as Voevodsky has
shown by developing an extensive code library of formalized mathematics
in this setting. Moreover, he is promoting more interaction between pure
mathematicians and the developers of such proof assistants, as is occurring
in the special year on Univalent Foundations at the Institute for Advanced
Study.
    For those interested in contributing to this new kind of mathematics, it
may be encouraging to know that there are many interesting open questions.
The most pressing of them is perhaps the “constructivity” of the Univalence
Axiom itself, conjectured by Voevodsky in [23]. It concerns the effect of
adding the Univalence Axiom on the computational behavior of the system
of type theory, and thus on the existing proof assistants. Another major
direction, of course, is the further formalization of classical results and cur-
rent mathematical research in the univalent setting. We expect that it will
eventually be possible to formalize large amounts of modern mathematics
in this setting, and that doing so will give rise to both theoretical insights
and good numerical algorithms (extracted from code in a proof assistant).
    In this direction, together with Voevodsky, the last two authors are work-
ing on an approach to the theory of integrable systems (using the new notion
of p-adic integrable system as a test case) in the univalent setting. A pre-
liminary treatment is the construction of the p-adic numbers is given in [17].
One of Voevodsky’s goals (as we understand it) is that in a not too distant
future, mathematicians will be able to verify the correctness of their own
papers by working within the system of univalent foundations formalized in
a proof assistant, and that doing so will become natural even for pure math-
ematicians (the same way that most mathematicians now typeset their own
papers in TEX). We believe that this aspect of the univalent foundations
program distinguishes it from other approaches to foundations, by providing
a practical utility for the working mathematician.
    Our goal in this announcement has been to give a brief and intentionally
superficial glimpse of two closely related, recent developments: homotopy
type theory and Voevodsky’s univalent foundations program. At present,
these subjects are still developing quite rapidly, and the current literature
is (with few exceptions) highly specialized and, unfortunately, largely in-
accessible to those without prior knowledge of homotopy theory and logic.
One exception is the survey article [18], which goes into much greater depth
than the present article, while still being intended for a general mathemati-

                                       5
cal readership; it also contains an introduction to the use of the Coq proof
assistant in the univalent setting. See also [1, 10, 23].

    Acknowledgements. We thank the Institute for Advanced Study for the
excellent resources which have been made available to the authors during the
preparation of this article. We thank Thierry Coquand, Dan Grayson, and
Vladimir Voevodsky for useful discussions on the topic of this paper, and the
referees for helpful suggestions. Awodey is partly supported by National Sci-
ence Foundation Grant DMS-1001191 and Air Force OSR Grant 11NL035.
Pelayo is partly supported by NSF CAREER Grant DMS-1055897, NSF
Grant DMS-0635607, and Spain Ministry of Science Grant Sev-2011-0087.
Warren is supported by the Oswald Veblen Fund.


References
  [1] S. Awodey, Type theory and homotopy.              On the arXiv as
      arXiv:1010:1810v1, 2010.

  [2] S. Awodey and M. A. Warren, Homotopy theoretic models of iden-
      tity types, Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
      Society 146 (2009), no. 1, 45-55.

  [3] A. Church, A set of postulates for the foundation of logic, Annals of
      Mathematics. Second Series 34 (1933), no. 4, 839-864.

  [4]          , A formulation of the simple theory of types, Journal of Sym-
        bolic Logic 5 (1940), 56-68.

  [5]          , The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion, Annals of Mathematics
        Studies, no. 6, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1941.

  [6] http://coq.inria.fr

  [7] http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/news/features/gonthierproof-101112.aspx

  [8] T. C. Hales, Formal proof, Notices of the American Mathematical
      Society 55 (2008), no. 11, 1370-1380.

  [9] M. Hofmann and T. Streicher, The groupoid interpretation of type
      theory, Twenty-five years of constructive type theory (Venice, 1995),
      Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1998, pp. 83–111.

 [10] http://homotopytypetheory.org

                                       6
[11] P. Martin-Löf, An intuitionistic theory of types: predicative part, Logic
     Colloquium ’73 (Bristol, 1973), North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975, pp.
     73-118. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 80.

[12]         , Constructive mathematics and computer programming. In
       Proceedings of the 6th International Congress for Logic, Methodol-
       ogy and Philosophy of Science, Amsterdam, 1979. North-Holland.

[13]          , Constructive mathematics and computer programming, Logic,
       methodology and philosophy of science, VI (Hannover, 1979), North-
       Holland, Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 153-175.

[14]          , Intuitionistic type theory, Studies in Proof Theory. Lecture
       Notes, vol. 1, Bibliopolis, Naples, 1984.

[15]           , An intuitionistic theory of types, Twenty-five years of con-
       structive type theory (Venice, 1995), Oxford Univ. Press, New York,
       1998, originally a 1972 preprint from the Department of Mathematics
       at the University of Stockholm, pp. 127-172.

[16] B. Nordström, K. Petersson, and J. M. Smith: Programming in
     Martin-Löf’s Type Theory. An Introduction. Oxford University Press,
     1990.

[17] Á. Pelayo, V. Voevodsky, M. A. Warren: A preliminary univalent
     formalization of the p-adic numbers, submitted, on the arXiv as
     arXiv:math/1302.1207, 2013.

[18] Á. Pelayo, M. A. Warren:       Homotopy type theory and Vo-
     evodsky’s univalent foundations, submitted, on the arXiv as
     arXiv:math/1210.5658, 2012.

[19] B. C. Pierce, Types and Programming Languages, MIT Press, Cam-
     bridge, MA, 2002.

[20] B. Russell, Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types,
     American Journal of Mathematics 30 (1908), 222–262.

[21] C. Simpson, Computer theorem proving in mathematics, Letters in
     Mathematical Physics 69 (2004), 287-315.

[22] V. Voevodsky, Notes on type systems, Unpublished notes,
     http://www.math.ias.edu/~vladimir/Site3/Univalent_Foundations.html,
     2009.

                                      7
 [23]         ,       Univalent   foundations    project,       Mod-
        ified   version     of  an     NSF     grant      application,
        http://www.math.ias.edu/~vladimir/Site3/Univalent_Foundations.html,
        2010.


Steve Awodey
Carnegie Mellon University
Department of Philosophy
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Institute for Advanced Study
School of Mathematics, Einstein Drive
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
E-mail addresses: awodey@cmu.edu, awodey@math.ias.edu


Álvaro Pelayo
Washington University
Department of Mathematics
One Brookings Drive, Campus Box 1146
St Louis, MO 63130 USA

Institute for Advanced Study
School of Mathematics, Einstein Drive
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
E-mail addresses: apelayo@math.wustl.edu, apelayo@math.ias.edu


Michael A. Warren
Institute for Advanced Study
School of Mathematics, Einstein Drive
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA.
E-mail address: mwarren@math.ias.edu




                                  8
