                                                        TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY

                                                                        STEVE AWODEY




arXiv:1010.1810v1 [math.CT] 9 Oct 2010
                                                                       1. Introduction
                                         The purpose of this informal survey article is to introduce the reader
                                         to a new and surprising connection between Geometry, Algebra, and
                                         Logic, which has recently come to light in the form of an interpreta-
                                         tion of the constructive type theory of Per Martin-Löf into homotopy
                                         theory, resulting in new examples of certain algebraic structures which
                                         are important in topology. This connection was discovered quite re-
                                         cently, and various aspects of it are now under active investigation by
                                         several researchers. (See [AW09, AHW09, War08, BG09, GG08, Garar,
                                         GvdB08, Lum09, BG10, Voe06].)
                                         1.1. Type theory. Martin-Löf type theory is a formal system origi-
                                         nally intended to provide a rigorous framework for constructive mathe-
                                         matics [ML75, ML98, ML84]. It is an extension of the typed λ-calculus
                                         admitting dependent types and terms. Under the Curry-Howard cor-
                                         respondence [How80], one identifies types with propositions, and terms
                                         with proofs; viewed thus, the system is at least as strong as second-
                                         order logic, and it is known to interpret constructive set theory [Acz74].
                                         Indeed, Martin-Löf type theory has been used successfully to formalize
                                         large parts of constructive mathematics, such as the theory of general-
                                         ized recursive definitions [NPS90, ML79]. Moreover, it is also employed
                                         extensively as a framework for the development of high-level program-
                                         ming languages, in virtue of its combination of expressive strength and
                                         desirable proof-theoretic properties [NPS90, Str91].
                                            In addition to simple types A, B, . . . and their terms x : A ⊢ b(x) : B,
                                         the theory also has dependent types x : A ⊢ B(x), which are regarded
                                         as indexed families of types. There are simple type forming operations
                                         A × B and A → B, as well  P as operations on dependentQ     types, including
                                         in particular the sum       x:A B(x) and product        x:A B(x) types (see
                                         the appendix for details). The Curry-Howard interpretation of the
                                         operations A × B and A → B is as propositional conjunction and
                                             Thanks to Pieter Hofstra, Peter Lumsdaine, and Michael Warren for their con-
                                         tributions to this article, and to Per Martin-Löf and Erik Palmgren for supporting
                                         this work over many years.
                                                                                 1
2                                STEVE AWODEY

implication, of course; the dependent types x : A ⊢ B(x) are predicates,
or more generally, relations,
                   x1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An ⊢ R(x1 , . . . , xn ),
                 P                    Q
and the sum        and product            operations are the existential ∃ and
universal ∀ quantifiers, respectively.
   It is now natural to further extend the type theory with a primitive
equality relation, corresponding to the equality formulas of first-order
logic. Specifically, given two terms a, b of the same type A, one can
form a new identity type IdA (a, b), representing the proposition that
a and b are equal; a term of this type thus represents a proof of the
proposition that a equals b. In the intensional version of the theory,
with which we are concerned here, one thus has two different notions
of equality: propositional equality is the notion represented by the
identity types, in that two terms are propositionally equal just if their
identity type IdA (a, b) is inhabited by a term. By contrast, defini-
tional equality is a primitive relation on terms and is not represented
by a type; it behaves much like equality between terms in the simply-
typed lambda-calculus, or any conventional equational theory.
   If the terms a and b are definitially equal, then (since they can be
freely substituted for each other) they are also propositionally equal;
but the converse is generally not true in the intensional version of the
theory (the rules for identity types are given in the appendix). In the
extensional theory, by contrast, the two notions of equality are forced
by an additional rule to coincide. As a consequence, the extensional
version of the theory is essentially a dependent type theory with a
standard, extensional equality relation. As is well-known, however, the
price one pays for this simplification is a loss of desirable proof-theoretic
properties, such as strong normalization and decidable type checking
and equality of terms [Str93, Str91, Hof95a].
   In the intensional theory, each type A is thus endowed by the iden-
tity types IdA (a, b) with a non-trivial structure. Indeed, this structure
was observed by Hofmann and Streicher in [HS98] to satisfy condi-
tions analogous to the familiar laws for groupoids.1 Specifically, the
posited reflexivity of propositional equality produces identity proofs
r(a) : IdA (a, a) for any term a : A, playing the role of a unit arrow 1a
for a; and when f : IdA (a, b) is an identity proof, then (corresponding
    1A groupoid is like a group, but with a partially-defined composition operation.
Precisely, a groupoid can be defined as a category in which every arrow has an
inverse. A group is thus a groupoid with only one object. Groupoids arise in
topology as generalized fundamental groups, not tied to a choice of basepoint (see
below).
                    TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                             3

to the symmetry of identity) there also exists a proof f −1 : IdA (b, a),
to be thought of as the inverse of f ; finally, when f : IdA (a, b) and
g : IdA (b, c) are identity proofs, then (corresponding to transitivity)
there is a new proof g ◦ f : IdA (a, c), thought of as the composite of f
and g. Moreover, this structure on each type A can be shown to satisfy
the usual groupoid laws, but significantly, only up to propositional
equality. We shall return to this point below.
   The constructive character, computational tractability, and proof-
theoretic clarity of the type theory are owed in part to this rather
subtle treatment of equality between terms, which itself is expressible
within the theory using the identity types IdA (a, b). Unlike extensional
equality, which is computationally intractable, the expressibility of in-
tensional equality within the theory leads to a system that is both
powerful and expressive while retaining its important computational
character. The cost of intensionality, however, has long been the result-
ing difficulty of finding a natural, conventional semantic interpretation.
(See [Hof97, Car86, Hof95b, Dyb96] for previous semantics).
   The new approach presented here constructs a bridge from con-
structive type theory to algebraic topology, exploiting both the ax-
iomatic approach to homotopy of Quillen model categories, as well
as the related algebraic methods involving (weak) higher-dimensional
groupoids. This at once provides two new domains of interpretation
for type theory. In doing so, it also permits logical methods to be
combined with the traditional algebraic and topological approaches to
homotopy theory, opening up a range of possible new applications of
type theory in homotopy and higher-dimensional algebra. It also allows
the importation into homotopy theory of computational tools based on
the type theory, such as the computer proof assistants Coq and Agda
(cf. [TLG06]).

1.2. Homotopy theory. In homotopy theory one is concerned with
spaces and continuous mappings up to homotopy; a homotopy be-
tween continuous maps f, g : X          / Y is a continuous map ϑ : X ×
[0, 1]   / Y satisfying ϑ(x, 0) = f (x) and ϑ(x, 1) = g(x). Such a homo-
topy ϑ can be thought of as a “continuous deformation” of f into g.
Two spaces are said to be homotopy-equivalent if there are continuous
maps going back and forth, the composites of which are homotopical
to the respective identity mappings. Such spaces may be thought of
as differing only by a continuous deformation. Algebraic invariants,
such as homology or the fundamental group, are homotopy-invariant,
in that any spaces that are homotopy-equivalent must have the same
invariants.
4                           STEVE AWODEY

   It is natural to also consider homotopies between homotopies, re-
ferred to as higher homotopies. When we consider a space X, a
distinguished point p ∈ X, and the paths in X beginning and ending
at p, and identify such paths up to homotopy, the result is the funda-
mental group π(X, p) of the space at the point. Pursuing an idea of
Grothendieck’s [Gro83], modern homotopy theory generalizes this clas-
sical construction in several directions: first, we remove the dependence
on the base-point p by considering the fundamental groupoid π(X),
consisting of all points and all paths up to homotopy. Next, rather than
identifying homotopic paths, we can consider the homotopies between
paths as distinct, new objects of a higher dimension (just as the paths
themselves are homotopies between points). Continuing in this way, we
obtain a structure consisting of the points of X, the paths in X, the ho-
motopies between paths, the higher homotopies between homotopies,
and so on for even higher homotopies. The resulting structure π∞ (X)
is called the fundamental weak ∞-groupoid of X. Such higher-
dimensional algebraic structures now play a central role in homotopy
theory (see e.g. [KV91]); they capture much more of the homotopical
information of a space than does the fundamental group π(X, p), or the
groupoid π(X) = π1 (X), which is a quotient of π∞ (X) by collapsing
the higher homotopies. As discussed in subsection 2.4 below, it has
recently been shown that such higher-dimensional groupoids also arise
naturally in intensional type theory.
   Another central concept in modern homotopy theory is that of a
Quillen model structure, which captures axiomatically some of the
essential features of homotopy of topological spaces, enabling one to
“do homotopy” in different mathematical settings, and to express the
fact that two settings carry the same homotopical information. Quillen
[Qui67] introduced model categories as an abstract framework for ho-
motopy theory which would apply to a wide range of mathematical
settings. Such a structure consists of the specification of three classes
of maps (the fibrations, weak equivalences, and cofibrations) satisfy-
ing certain conditions typical of the leading topological examples. The
resulting framework of axiomatic homotopy theory allows the devel-
opment of the main lines of classical homotopy theory (fundamental
groups, homotopies of maps, strong and weak equivalence, homotopy
limits, etc.) independently of any one specific setting. Thus, for in-
stance, it is also applicable not only in spaces and simplicial sets, but
also in new settings, as in the work of Voevodsky on the homotopy the-
ory of schemes [MV99], or that of Joyal [Joy02, Joy] and Lurie [Lur09]
on quasicategories. In the work under consideration here (subsection
2.3), it is shown that Martin-Löf type theory can be interpreted in any
                    TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                            5

model category. This allows the use of type theory to reason formally
and systematically about homotopy theory.
                2. The homotopy interpretation
2.1. Background. Among the most thorough, recent treatments of
the extensional type theory are the two papers [MP00, MP02] by Mo-
erdijk and Palmgren from 2000 and 2002. The authors also announced
a projected third paper devoted to the intensional theory, which never
appeared. Their intention was presumably to make use of higher cate-
gories and, perhaps, Quillen model structures. No preliminary results
were stated, but see [Pal03].
   In 2006, Vladimir Voevodsky gave a series of lectures at Stanford
University entitled “Homotopy lambda-calculus”, in which an inter-
pretation of intensional type theory into simplicial sets was proposed
(see [Voe06]). At the same time, and independently, the author and
his doctoral student Michael Warren established the interpretation of
intensional type theory in Quillen model structures, following a sug-
gestion of Moerdijk.
   All of these approaches derive from the pioneering work of Hoffmann
and Streicher [HS98], which we now summarize.
2.2. Groupoid semantics. A model of type theory is extensional if
the following reflection rule is satisfied:
                          p : IdA (a, b)
                                         Id-reflection
                           a=b:A
I.e., the identity type IdA (a, b) in extensional models captures no more
information than whether or not the terms a and b are definitionally
equal. Although type checking is decidable in the intensional theory, it
fails to be so in the extensional theory obtained by adding Id-reflection
as a rule governing identity types. This fact is the principal moti-
vation for studying intensional rather than extensional type theories
(cf. [Str91] for a discussion of the difference between the intensional
and extensional forms of the theory). A good notion of a model for the
extensional theory is due to Seely [See84], who showed that one can in-
terpret type dependency in locally cartesian closed categories in a very
natural way. (There are certain coherence issues, prompting a later
refinement by Hofmann [Hof97], but this need not concern us here.)
Of course, intensional type theory can also be interpreted this way, but
then the interpretation of the identity types necessarily becomes trivial
in the above sense
   The first natural, non-trivial semantics for intensional type theory
were developed by Hoffmann and Streicher [HS98] using groupoids,
6                            STEVE AWODEY

which are categories in which every arrow is an iso. The category
of groupoids is not locally cartesian closed [Pal03], and the model
employs certain fibrations (equivalently, groupoid-valued functors) to
model type dependency. Intuitively, the identity type over a groupoid
G is interpreted as the groupoid G→ of arrows in G, so that an identity
proof f : IdA (a, b) becomes an arrow f : a → b in G. The interpre-
tation no longer validates extensionality, since there can be different
elements a, b related by non-identity arrows f : a → b. Indeed, there
may be many different such arrows f, g : a ⇒ b ; however—unlike in the
type theory—these cannot in turn be further related by identity terms
of higher type ϑ : IdIdA (f, g), since a (conventional) groupoid generally
has no such higher-dimensional structure. Thus the groupoid semantics
validates a certain truncation principle, stating that all higher identity
types are trivial—a form of extensionality one dimension up. In par-
ticular, the groupoid laws for the identity types are strictly satisfied in
these models, rather than holding only up to propositional equality.
   This situation suggests the use of the higher-dimensional analogues of
groupoids, as formulated in homotopy theory, in order to provide mod-
els admitting non-trivial higher identity types. Such higher groupoids
occur naturally as the (higher) fundamental groupoids of spaces (as
discussed above). A step in this direction was made by Garner [Garar],
who uses a 2-dimensional notion of fibration to model intensional type
theory in 2-groupoids, and shows that when various truncation axioms
are added, the resulting theory is sound and complete with respect
to this semantics. In his dissertation [War08], Warren showed that
infinite-dimensional groupoids also give rise to models, which validate
no such additional truncation axioms (see also [War10]). Such models
do, however, satisfy type-theoretically unprovable strictness conditions
such as the associativity of composition. It seems clear that one will
ultimately need to use weak infinite dimensional groupoids in order
to faithfully model the full intensional type theory (see subsection 2.4
below).


2.3. Homotopical models of type theory. Groupoids and their ho-
momorphisms arise in homotopy theory as a “model” (i.e. a representa-
tion) of topological spaces with homotopy classes of continuous maps.
There are other models as well, such as simplicial sets. The idea of
a Quillen model structure (cf. [Qui67, Bou77]) is to axiomatize the
common features of these different models of homotopy, allowing one
to develop the theory in an abstract general setting, and to compare
different particular settings.
                     TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                              7

   This axiomatic framework also provides a convenient way of specify-
ing a general semantics for intensional type theory, not tied to a particu-
lar choice of groupoids, 2-groupoids, ∞-groupoids, simplicial sets, etc.,
or even spaces themselves. The basic result in this connection states
that it is possible to model the intensional type theory in any Quillen
model category [AW09] (see also [War08]). The idea is that a type is
interpreted as an abstract “space” X and a term x : X ⊢ a(x) : A as a
continuous function a : X       / A. Thus e.g. a closed term a : A is a point
a of A, an identity term p : IdA (a, b) is then a path p : a ❀ b in A (a ho-
motopy between points!). A “higher” identity term ϑ : IdIdA (a,b) (p, q)
is a homotopy between the paths p and q, and so on for even higher
identity terms and higher homotopies. In this interpretation, one uses
abstract “fibrations” to interpret dependent types, and abstract “path
spaces” to model identity types, recovering the groupoid model and its
relatives as special cases.
   In [GG08] it was then shown that the type theory itself carries a
natural homotopy structure (i.e. a weak factorization system), so that
the theory is not only sound, but also logically complete with respect to
such abstract homotopical semantics. While some “coherence” issues
regarding the strictness of the interpretation remain to be worked out
(again, see [War08], as well as [BG10]), together these results clearly
establish not only the viability of the homotopical interpretation as a
semantics for type theory, but also the possibility of using type theory
to reason in Quillen model structures. That is to say, they suggest that
intensional type theory can be seen as a “logic of homotopy theory”.
   In order to describe the interpretation in somewhat more detail, we
first recall a few standard definitions. In any category C, given maps
f :A        / B and g : C    / D, we write f ⋔ g to indicate that f has
the left-lifting property (LLP) with respect to g: for any commutative
square
                                        h   /C
                                    A       >
                                f       j        g
                                            
                                 B          /D
                                        i


there exists a diagonal map j : B    / C such that j ◦f = h and g ◦j = i.
If M is any collection of maps in C, we denote by ⋔ M the collection of
maps in C having the LLP with respect to all maps in M. The collection
of maps M⋔ is defined similarly. A weak factorization system (L, R) in
a category C consists of two collections L (the “left-class”) and R (the
“right-class”) of maps in C such that:
8                             STEVE AWODEY

    (1) Every map f : A       / B has a factorization as f = p ◦ i, where
        i ∈ L and p ∈ R.
                                      i    /C
                                A@
                                     @@
                                         @@ p
                                       @@
                                     f       
                                           B,
    (2) L = ⋔ R and L⋔ = R.
   A (closed) model category [Qui67] is a bicomplete category C equipped
with subcategories F (fibrations), C (cofibrations) and W (weak equiv-
alences), satisfying the following two conditions: (1) Given any maps
g ◦ f = h, if any two of f, g, h are weak equivalences, then so is the
third; (2) both (C, F ∩ W) and (C ∩ W, F) are weak factorization sys-
tems. A map f in a model category is a trivial cofibration if it is both
a cofibration and a weak equivalence. Dually, a trivial fibration is a
map which is both a fibration and a weak equivalence. An object A is
said to be fibrant if the canonical map A      / 1 is a fibration. Dually,
A is cofibrant if 0    / A is a cofibration.
   Examples of model categories include the following:
    (1) The category Top of topological spaces, with fibrations the Serre
        fibrations, weak equivalences the weak homotopy equivalences,
        and cofibrations those maps which have the LLP with respect
        to trivial fibrations. The cofibrant objects in this model struc-
        ture are retracts of spaces constructed, like CW-complexes, by
        attaching cells.
    (2) The category SSet of simplicial sets, with cofibrations the monomor-
        phisms, fibrations the Kan fibrations, and weak equivalences the
        weak homotopy equivalences. The fibrant objects for this model
        structure are the Kan complexes.
    (3) The category Gpd of (small) groupoids, with cofibrations the
        homomorphisms that are injective on objects, fibrations the
        Grothendieck fibrations, and weak equivalences the categorical
        equivalences. Here all objects are both fibrant and cofibrant.
See e.g. [DS95, Hov99] for further examples and details.
  Finally, recall that in any model category C, a (very good) path object
 I
A for an object A consists of a factorization
                                    r
                              A FF      / AI                          (1)
                                 FF
                                   FF
                                      F    p
                                  ∆ FF# 
                                          A × A,
                     TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                              9

of the diagonal map ∆ : A        / A × A as a trivial cofibration r followed
by a fibration p (see [Hov99]). Paradigm examples of path objects
are given by exponentiation by a suitable “unit interval” I in either
Gpd or, when the object A is a Kan complex, in SSet. In e.g. the
former case, GI is just the “arrow groupoid” G→ , consisting of all
arrows in the groupoid G. Path objects always exist, but are not
uniquely determined. In many examples, however, they can be chosen
functorially.
   We can now describe the homotopy interpretation of type theory
more precisely. Whereas the idea of the Curry-Howard correspon-
dence is often summarized by the slogan “Propositions as Types”, the
idea underlying the homotopy interpretation is instead “Fibrations as
Types”. In classical topology, and in most model categories, a fibra-
tion p : E     / X can be thought of as a family of objects Ex varying
continuously in a parameter x ∈ X. (The path-lifting property of a
topological fibration describes how to get from one fiber Ex = p−1 (x)
to another Ey along a path f : x ❀ y). This notion gives the inter-
pretation of type dependency. Specifically, assume that C is a finitely
complete category with (at least) a weak factorization system (L, R).
Because most interesting examples arise from model categories, we re-
fer to maps in L as trivial cofibrations and those in R as fibrations. A
judgement ⊢ A : type is then interpreted as a fibrant object A of C.
Similarly, a dependent type x : A ⊢ B(x) : type is interpreted as a
fibration p : B     / A. Terms x : A ⊢ b(x) : B(x) in context are inter-
preted as sections b : A     / B of p : B     / A, i.e. p ◦ b = 1A . Thinking
of fibrant objects as types and fibrations as dependent types, the nat-
ural interpretation of the identity type IdA (a, b) should then be as the
fibration of paths in A from a to b, so that the type x, y : A ⊢ IdA (x, y)
should be the “fibration of all paths in A”. That is, it should be a path
object for A.
Theorem 2.1 ([AW09]). Let C be a finitely complete category with a
weak factorization system and a functorial choice of stable path objects
AI : i.e., given any fibration A       / X and any map f : Y    / X, the
evident comparison map is an isomorphism,
                            f ∗ (AI ) ∼
                                      = f ∗ (A)I .
Then C is a model of Martin-Löf type theory with identity types.
   The proof exhibits the close connection between type theory and
axiomatic reasoning in this setting: We verify the rules for the identity
types (see the Appendix). Given a fibrant object A, the judgement
x, y : A ⊢ IdA (x, y) is interpreted as the path object fibration p :
10                            STEVE AWODEY

AI    / A × A, see (1). Because p is then a fibration, the formation rule

                       x, y : A ⊢ IdA (x, y) : type
is satisfied. Similarly, the introduction rule
                         x : A ⊢ r(x) : IdA (x, x)
is valid because the interpretation r : A     / AI is a section of p over
∆:A       / A × A. For the elimination and conversion rules, assume that
the following premisses are given
            x : A, y : A, z : IdA (x, y) ⊢ D(x, y, z) : type,
                                        x : A ⊢ d(x) : D(x, x, r(x)).
We have, therefore, a fibration q : D / AI together with a map d :
A   / D such that q ◦ d = r. This data yields the following (outer)
commutative square:
                                           d   /D
                                A              =
                                r          j         q
                                                
                                AI             / AI
                                           1

Because q is a fibration and r is, by definition, a trivial cofibration,
there exists a diagonal filler j, which we choose as the interpretation
of the term:
            x, y : A, z : IdA (x, y) ⊢ J(d, x, y, z) : D(x, y, z).
Commutativity of the bottom triangle is precisely this conclusion of the
elimination rule, and commutativity of the top triangle is the required
conversion rule:
             x : A ⊢ J(d, x, x, r(x)) = d(x) : D(x, x, r(x)).
   Examples of categories satisfying the hypotheses of this theorem in-
clude groupoids, simplicial sets, and many simplicial model categories
[Qui67] (including, e.g., simplicial sheaves and presheaves). There is
a question of selecting the diagonal fillers j as interpretations of the
J-terms in a “coherent way”, i.e. respecting substitutions of terms for
variables. Some solutions to this problem are discussed in [AW09,
War08, Gar07]. One neat solution is implicit in the recent work of
Riehl [Rie10] on “algebraic” Quillen model structures. A systematic
investigation of the issue of coherence, along with several examples of
coherent models derived from homotopy theory, can be found in the
recent work [BG10] of van den Berg and Garner.
                     TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                            11

2.4. Higher algebraic structures. Given the essential soundness
and completeness of type theory with respect to the homotopical in-
terpretation, we may further ask how expressive the logical system is,
as a language for homotopy theory? From this point of view, we think
of the types in the intensional theory as spaces, the terms of the type
A are the points of the “space” A, the identity type IdA (a, b) repre-
sents the collection of paths from a to b, and the higher identities are
homotopies between paths, homotopies between homotopies of paths,
etc., and we ask what homotopically relevant facts, properties, and
structures are logically expressible. The topological fact that paths
and homotopies do not form a groupoid, but only a groupoid up to
homotopy, is of course reminiscent of the logical fact that the identity
types only satisfy the groupoid laws up to propositional equality. This
apparent analogy between homotopy theory and type theory can now
be made precise, and indeed can be recognized as one and the same
fact, resting entirely on the homotopical interpretation of the logic.
The fundamental weak ω-groupoid of a space is namely a construction
entirely within the logical system — it belongs, as it were, to the logic
of homotopy theory, as we now proceed to explain.

2.4.1. Weak ω-groupoids. It has recently been shown by Peter Lums-
daine [Lum09] and, independently, Benno van den Berg and Richard
Garner [BG09, vdB], that the tower of identity types over any fixed
base type A in the type theory bears an infinite dimensional algebraic
structure of exactly the kind arising in homotopy theory, called a weak
ω-groupoid ([KV91, Lei02, Che07, Bro87]).
   In somewhat more detail, in the globular approach to higher groupoids
[Lei04, Bat98], a weak ω-groupoid has objects (“0-cells”), arrows (“1-
cells”) between objects, 2-cells between 1-cells, and so on, with various
composition operations and laws depending on the kind of groupoid in
question (strict or weak, n- or ω-, etc.). We first require the notion of
a globular set, which may be thought of as an “infinite-dimensional”
graph. Specifically, a globular set ([Bat98, Str00]) is a presheaf on the
category G generated by arrows
                            s0        s1
                                 /         /    /
                        0        /1        /2       / ...
                            t0        t1

subject to the equations ss = ts, st = tt. More concretely, a globular
set A• has a set An of “n-cells” for each n ∈ N, and each (n + 1)-cell x
has parallel source and target n-cells s(x), t(x). (Cells x, y of dimension
> 0 are parallel if s(x) = s(y) and t(x) = t(y); all 0-cells are considered
parallel.)
12                                 STEVE AWODEY


                                                                         f

                                             f
           a      a    f     b          a          $ b        a          ϑ                b
           •      •          /•         •      α :•           • α                         D•
                                                                                  _*4 β
                                             
                                             g
                                                                    !       }
                                                                         g



                 Figure 1. Some cells in dimensions 0–3.

     For example, given a type A in a type theory T, the terms of types
                                  A, IdA , IdIdA , . . . ,
together with the evident indexing projections, e.g. s(p) = a and t(p) =
b for p : IdA (a, b), form a globular set Â.
   A strict ω-groupoid is an infine-dimensional groupoid satisfying, in
all dimensions, associativity, unit, and inverse laws given by equations
between certain cells. Such a groupoid has an underlying globular set
consisting of cells of each dimension, and any globular set A• generates
a free strict ω-groupoid F (A• )—just as any set generates a free group,
and any graph, a free groupoid. The cells of F (A• ) are free (strictly
associative) pastings-together of cells from A• and their formal duals,
including degenerate pastings from the identity cells of F (A• ). In a
strict ω-groupoid, cells can be composed along a common boundary in
any lower dimension, and the composition satisfies various associativity,
unit, and interchange laws, captured by the generalized associativity
law: each labelled pasting diagram has a unique composite.
   In a weak ω-groupoid, by contrast, we do not expect strict associa-
tivity, and so we may have multiple composition maps for each shape
of pasting diagram; but we do demand that these composites agree up
to cells of the next dimension, and that these associativity cells satisfy
coherence laws of their own, and so on.
   Now, this is exactly the situation we find in intensional type theory.
For instance, even in constructing a term witnessing the transitivity of
identity, one finds that there is no single canonical candidate. Specifi-
cally, as a composition for the pasting diagram
                                    ·       /·           /·

or more concretely, a term c such that
            x, y, z : X, p : Id(x, y), q : Id(y, z) ⊢ c(q, p) : Id(x, z),
                       TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                                     13

there are the two equally natural terms cl , cr obtained by applying
(Id-elim) to p and q respectively. These are not definitionally equal,
but are propositionally equal, i.e. equal up to a 2-cell, for there is a
term e with
    x, y, z : X, p : Id(x, y), q : Id(y, z) ⊢ e(q, p) : Id(cl (q, p), cr (q, p)).
Indeed, we have the following:
Theorem 2.2 ([Lum09, BG09]). Let A be any type in a system T of
intensional Martin-Löf type theory. Then the globular set Â of terms
of type
                           A, IdA , IdIdA , . . .
carries a natural weak ω-groupoid structure.
  It is now quite natural to ask what special properties this particular
ω-groupoid has in virtue of its type-theoretic construction. In light
of related syntactic constructions of other types of free algebras, a
reasonable conjecture is that it is the free weak ω-groupoid, up to
a suitable notion of equivalence. We return to this question below.
2.4.2. Weak n-groupoids. A further step in exploring the connection
between type theory and homotopy is to investigate the relationship
between type theoretic “truncation” (i.e. higher-dimensional extention-
ality principles) and topological “truncation” of the higher fundamental
groups. Spaces for which the homotopy type is already completely de-
termined by the fundamental groupoid are called homotopy 1-types,
or simply 1-types [Bau95]. More generally, one has n-types, which are
thought of as spaces which have no homotopical information above di-
mension n. One of the goals of homotopy theory is to obtain good
models of homotopy n-types. For example, the category of groupoids
is Quillen equivalent to the category of 1-types; in this precise sense,
groupoids are said to model homotopy 1-types. A famous conjecture
of Grothendieck’s is that (arbitrary) homotopy types are modeled by
weak ∞-groupoids (see e.g. [Bat98] for a precise statement).
   Recent work [AHW09] by the author, Pieter Hofstra, and Michael
Warren has shown that the 1-truncation of the intensional theory, ar-
rived at by adding the analogue of the Id-reflection rule for all terms
of identity type, generates a Quillen model structure on a category of
structured graphs that is Quillen equivalent to that of groupoids. In a
precise sense, the truncated system of 1-dimensional type theory thus
models the homotopy 1-types.
   In a bit more detail, for every globular set A• one can define a system
of type theory T(A• ), the basic terms of which are the elements of the
14                           STEVE AWODEY

various An , typed as terms of the corresponding identity type deter-
mined by the globular structure: e.g. a ∈ An is a basic term of type
IdA (s(a), t(a)), where s, t : An ⇒ An−1 are the source and target maps,
at dimension n, of A• . Since we know from the result of Lumsdaine et
al. [Lum09, BG09], just reviewed, that for any type X, the underlying
globular set of terms of the various identity types X, IdX , IdIdX , . . .
gives rise to a weak ω-groupoid, we can infer that in particular the
globular set of terms over the ground type A0 in the theory T(A• )
form such a groupoid, generated type-theoretically from the arbi-
trary globular set A• . Let us call this weak ω-groupoid Gω (A• ), the
type-theoretically free weak ω-groupoid generated by A• . This con-
struction is investigated in depth in [AHW09], where certain groupoids
of this kind are termed Martin-Löf complexes (technically, these are
the algebras for the globular monad just described).
   It is clearly of interest to investigate the relationship between this
type-theoretic construction of higher groupoids and both the alge-
braically free higher groupoids, on the one hand, and the higher group-
oids arising from spaces as fundamental groupoids, on the other. As a
first step, one can consider the 1-dimensional truncation of the above
construction, and the resulting (1-) groupoid G1 (A• ). For that case, the
following result relating G1 (A• ) to the usual, algebraically free groupoid
is established in the work cited:
Theorem 2.3 ([AHW09]). The type-theoretically free groupoid is equiv-
alent to the algebraically free groupoid.
  Furthermore, it is shown that the 1-truncated Martin-Löf complexes
admit a Quillen model structure equivalent to that of (1-) groupoids.
The following then results from known facts from homotopy theory:
Theorem 2.4 ([AHW09]). The 1-truncated Martin-Löf complexes clas-
sify homotopy 1-types.
  Obviously, one should now proceed to higher groupoids and the cor-
responding type theories truncated at higher dimensions.
            3. Conclusion: The logic of homotopy
   The application of logic in geometry and topology via categorical
algebra has a precedent in the development of topos theory. Invented
by Grothendieck as an abstract framework for sheaf cohomology, the
notion of a topos was soon discovered to have a logical interpretation,
admitting the use of logical methods into topology (see e.g. [JT84]
for just one of many examples). Equally important was the resulting
flow of geometric and topological ideas and methods into logic, e.g.
                    TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                            15

sheaf-theoretic independence proofs, topological semantics for many
non-classical systems, and an abstract treatment of realizability (see
the encyclopedic work [Joh03]).
   An important and lively research program in current homotopy the-
ory is the pursuit (again following Grothendieck [Gro83]) of a gen-
eral concept of “stack,” subsuming sheaves of homotopy types, higher
groupoids, quasi-categories, and the like. Two important works in this
area have just appeared (Lurie, Higher Topos Theory [Lur09]; Joyal,
Theory of Quasi-Categories [Joy]). It may be said, somewhat roughly,
that the notion of a “higher-dimensional topos” is to homotopy what
that of a topos is to topology (as in [JT91]). This concept also has
a clear categorical-algebraic component via Grothendieck’s “homotopy
hypothesis”, which states that n-groupoids are combinatorial models
for homotopy n-types, and ∞-groupoids are models for arbitrary ho-
motopy types of spaces. Still missing from the recent development of
higher-dimensional toposes, however, is a logical aspect analogous to
that of (1-dimensional) topos theory. The research surveyed here sug-
gests that such a logic is already available in intensional type theory.
The homotopy interpretation of Martin-Löf type theory into Quillen
model categories, and the related results on type-theoretic construc-
tions of higher groupoids, are analogous to the basic results inter-
preting extensional type theory and higher-order logic in (1-) toposes.
They clearly indicate that the logic of higher toposes—i.e., the logic of
homotopy—is, rather remarkably, a form of intensional type theory.

               Appendix A. Rules of type theory
This appendix recalls (some of) the rules of intensional Martin-Löf type
theory. See [ML84, NPS90, Jac99] for detailed presentations.

Judgement forms. There are four basic forms of judgement:
                      A : type       a:A
                      a=b:A          A = B : type
Each form can occur also with free variables: e.g. if A is a type, then
                          x : A ⊢ B(x) : type
is called a dependent type, regarded as an A-indexed family of types.
The part x : A to the left of the turnstile ⊢ is called the context of the
judgement. More generally, a list of variable declarations x1 : A1 , x2 :
A2 , . . . , xn : An is a context whenever the judgements A1 : type and
                   x1 : A1 , ..., xm : Am ⊢ Am+1 : type
16                           STEVE AWODEY

are derivable, for 1 ≤ m < n. Given such a context Γ, the judgement
Γ ⊢ A : type means that A is a type (in context Γ), while Γ ⊢ a :
A indicates that a is a term of type A (in context Γ); the equality
judgements have their usual meaning.

Formation rules.
              P     Given an A-indexed
                                     Q family of types B(x), the de-
pendent sum x:A .B(x) and product x:A .B(x) can be formed. The
identity type introduces a new dependent type IdA for any type A.
                   x : A ⊢ B(x) : type Q
                     Q                   formation
                       x:A B(x) : type



                   x : A ⊢ B(x) : type P
                     P                   formation
                        x:A B(x) : type



                          A : type
                                               Id formation
              x : A, y : A ⊢ IdA (x, y) : type

Under the Curry-Howard correspondence, sums correspond to existen-
tial quantifiers, products to universal quantifiers, and identity types to
equations. The behavior of each of these types is specified by introduc-
tion, elimination and conversion rules.

Rules for dependent products.
                  x : A ⊢ f (x) : B(x) Q
                            Q            introduction
                  λx.f (x) : x:A B(x)

                             Q
                 a:A    f : x:A B(x) Q
                                       elimination
                   app(f, a) : B(a).

              a:A      x : A ⊢ f (x) : B(x) Q
                                             conversion
             app λx.f (x), a = f (a) : B(a)

The introduction rule states thatQ for every family of terms f (x) : B(x)
there is a term λx.f (x) of type x:A B(x). The elimination rule cor-
responds to the application of a term f of the indexed product to
a : A. Finally, the conversion rule for states that the application term
app(−, a) behaves correctly when applied to a term of the form λx.f (x).
                        TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                              17

Rules for dependent sums.
                       a:A       b : B(a) P
                               P            introduction
                       ha, bi : x:A B(x)
      P
 p:       x:A B(x)     x : A, y : B(x) ⊢ c(x, y) : C(hx, yi) P
                                                               elimination
                         σ(c, p) : C(p)

a:A          b : B(a)      x : A, y : B(x) ⊢ c(x, y) : C(hx, yi) P
                                                                   conversion
                 σ(c, ha, bi) = c(a, b) : C(ha, bi)
The variables x : A, y : B(a) are bound in the the notation σ(c, p).
  Note that when A and B are types in the same context, the usual
product A × B and function  P A → B Q    types from the simply typed
λ-calculus are recovered as x:A B and x:A B, respectively.
Rules for identity types.
                             a:A          Id introduction
                        r(a) : IdA (a, a)

                     x : A, y : A, z : IdA (x, y) ⊢ B(x, y, z) : type
                                                            
 c : IdA (a, b)                 x : A ⊢ d(x) : B x, x, r(x)
                                                              Id elimination
                     J(d, a, b, c) : B(a, b, c)

                                a:A                    Id conversion
             J d, a, a, r(a)     = d(a) : B a, a, r(a)
The introduction rule provides a witness r(a) that a is identical to
itself, called the reflexivity term. The distinctive elimination rule can
be recognized as a form of Leibniz’s law. The variable x : A is bound
in the the notation J(d, a, b, c).
                                    References
[Acz74] P. Aczel. The strength of Martin-Löf’s type theory with one universe. In
        S. Miettinen and J J. Vaananen, editors, Proceedings of the Symposium
        on Mathematical Logic, pages 1–32, 1974.
[AHW09] S. Awodey, P. Hofstra, and M. A. Warren. Martin-Löf complexes. 2009.
        Submitted, on the arXiv as arXiv:0906.4521.
[AW09] S. Awodey and M. A. Warren. Homotopy theoretic models of identity
        types. Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 146:45–55, 2009.
[Bat98] M. A. Batanin. Monoidal globular categories as a natural environment
        for the theory of weak n-categories. Adv. Math., 136(1):39–103, 1998.
[Bau95] H.-J. Baues. Homotopy types. In I. M. James, editor, Handbook of Alge-
        braic Topology, pages 1–72. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1995.
18                             STEVE AWODEY

[BG09]   B. van den Berg and R. Garner. Types are weak ω-groupoids. Submitted,
         2009.
[BG10]   B. van den Berg and R. Garner. Topological and simplicial models of
         identity types. Submitted, 2010.
[Bou77] A. K. Bousfield. Constructions of factorization systems in categories.
         Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 9:207–220, 1977.
[Bro87] R. Brown. From groups to groupoids. Bulletin of the London Mathemat-
         ical Society, 19:113–134, 1987.
[Car86] J. Cartmell. Generalised algebraic theories and contextual categories.
         Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 32(3):209–243, 1986.
[Che07] E. Cheng. An ω-category with all duals is an ω-groupoid. Appl. Categ.
         Structures, 15(4):439–453, 2007.
[DS95]   W. G. Dwyer and J. Spalinski. Homotopy theories and model categories.
         In I. M. James, editor, Handbook of Algebraic Topology, pages 73–126.
         North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1995.
[Dyb96] P. Dybjer. Internal type theory. In Proc. BRA TYPES workshop, Torino,
         June 1995, volume 1158 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., Berlin, 1996.
         Springer-Verlag.
[Gar07] R. Garner. Cofibrantly generated natural weak factorisation systems.
         2007. Submitted, on the arXiv as math.CT/0702290.
[Garar] R. Garner. Two-dimensional models of type theory. Math. Structures
         Comput. Sci., To appear.
[GG08] N. Gambino and R. Garner. The identity type weak factorisation system.
         Submitted, on the arXiv as arXiv:0803.4349v1, 2008.
[Gro83] A. Grothendieck. Pursuing stacks. Unpublished letter to Quillen, 1983.
[GvdB08] R. Garner and B. van den Berg. Types are weak ω-groupoids. Submitted,
         2008.
[Hof95a] M. Hofmann. Extensional Concepts in Intensional Type Theory. PhD
         thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1995.
[Hof95b] M. Hofmann. On the interpretation of type theory in locally cartesian
         closed categories. In J. Tiuryn and Leszek Pacholski, editors, Computer
         Science Logic 1994, pages 427–441. Springer, 1995.
[Hof97]  M. Hofmann. Syntax and semantics of dependent types. In P. Dybjer
         and A. M. Pitts, editors, Semantics and Logics of Computation, Pub-
         lications of the Newton Institute, pages 79–130. Cambridge University
         Press, Cambridge, 1997.
[Hov99] M. Hovey. Model Categories, volume 63 of Math. Surveys and Monogr.
         American Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 1999.
[How80] W. A. Howard. The formulae-as-types notion of construction. In J. P.
         Seldin and J. R. Hindley, editors, To H. B. Curry: Essays on Combina-
         tory Logic, Lambda Calculus and Formalism, pages 479–490. Academic
         Press, London, 1980.
[HS98]   M. Hofmann and T. Streicher. The groupoid interpretation of type the-
         ory. In Sambin and Smith [SS98], pages 83–111.
[Jac99]  B. Jacobs. Categorical Logic and Type Theory. North-Holland Publishing
         Co., Amsterdam, 1999.
[Joh03] P. T. Johnstone. Sketches of an Elephant. Oxford University Press, Ox-
         ford, 2003. 2 vol.s.
                       TYPE THEORY AND HOMOTOPY                                  19

[Joy]     A. Joyal. The Theory of Quasi-Categories. In preparation.
[Joy02]   A. Joyal. Quasi-categories and Kan complexes. Journal of Pure and Ap-
          plied Algebra, 175:207–222, 2002.
[JT84]    A. Joyal and M. Tierney. An Extension of the Galois theory of
          Grothendieck, volume 51 of Memoirs of the AMS. American Mathemat-
          ical Society, 1984.
[JT91]    A. Joyal and M. Tierney. Strong stacks and classifying spaces. In Cat-
          egory Theory (Como, 1990), volume 1488 of Lecture Notes in Math.,
          pages 213–236, Berlin, 1991. Springer.
[KV91]    M. M. Kapranov and V. A. Voevodsky. ∞-groupoids and homotopy
          types. Cahiers de Topologie et Géometrie Différentielle Catégoriques,
          32(1):29–46, 1991.
[Lei02]   T. Leinster. A survey of definitions of n-category. Theory Appl. Categ.,
          10:1–70 (electronic), 2002.
[Lei04]   T. Leinster. Higher Operads, Higher Categories. Number 298 in London
          Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
          2004.
[Lum09]   P. L. Lumsdaine. Weak ω-categories from intensional type theory. In
          Typed Lambda-calculus and its applications, 2009.
[Lur09]   J. Lurie. Higher Topos Theory. Princeton University Press, 2009.
[ML75]    P. Martin-Löf. An intuitionistic theory of types: predicative part. In
          H. E. Rose and J. C. Shepherdson, editors, Logic Colloquium ’73, pages
          73–118, Amsterdam, 1975. North-Holland.
[ML79]    P. Martin-Löf. Constructive mathematics and computer programming.
          In Proceedings of the 6th International Congress for Logic, Methodology
          and Philosophy of Science, Amsterdam, 1979. North-Holland.
[ML84]    P. Martin-Löf. Intuitionistic Type Theory. Bibliopolis, Napoli, 1984.
[ML98]    P. Martin-Löf. An intuitionistic theory of types. In Sambin and Smith
          [SS98], pages 127–172. This paper was originally a 1972 preprint from
          the Department of Mathematics at the University of Stockholm.
[MP00]    I. Moerdijk and E. Palmgren. Wellfounded trees in categories. Ann. Pure
          Appl. Logic, 104:189–218, 2000.
[MP02]    I. Moerdijk and E. Palmgren. Type theories, toposes and constructive set
          theory: predicative aspects of AST. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 114:155–201,
          2002.
[MV99]    F. Morel and V. Voevodsky. A1 -homotopy theory of schemes. Publica-
          tions Mathématiques de l’I.H.E.S., 90:45–143, 1999.
[NPS90]   B. Nordström, K. Petersson, and J. M. Smith. Programming in Martin-
          Löf ’s Type Theory. An Introduction. Oxford University Press, 1990.
[Pal03]   E. Palmgren. Groupoids and local cartesian closure. Department of
          Mathematics Technical Report 2003:21, Uppsala University, 2003.
[Qui67]   D. Quillen. Homotopical Algebra, volume 43 of Lecture Notes in Mathe-
          matics. Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 1967.
[Rie10]   E. Riehl. Algebraic model structures. 2010. on the archive under
          arXiv:0910.2733v2.
[See84]   R. A. G. Seely. Locally cartesian closed categories and type theory. Math.
          Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 95:33–48, 1984.
20                              STEVE AWODEY

[SS98]  G. Sambin and J. Smith, editors. Twenty-Five Years of Constructive
        Type Theory, volume 36 of Oxford Logic Guides, Oxford, 1998. Oxford
        University Press.
[Str91] T. Streicher. Semantics of Type Theory. Progress in Theoretical Com-
        puter Science. Birkhauser, Basel, 1991.
[Str93] T. Streicher. Investigations Into Intensional Type Theory. Habilitation-
        sschrift, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, November 1993.
[Str00] R. Street. The petit topos of globular sets. J. P. Appl. Algebra, 154:299–
        315, 2000.
[TLG06] L. Théry, P. Letouzey, and G. Gonthier. Coq. In Freek Wiedijk, editor,
        The Seventeen Provers of the World, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
        pages 28–35. Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 2006.
[vdB]   B. van den Berg. Types as weak ω-categories. Lecture delivered in Upp-
        sala, 2006, and unpublished notes.
[Voe06] V. Voevodsky. A very short note on the homotopy λ-calculus. Unpub-
        lished note, 2006.
[War08] M. A. Warren. Homotopy Theoretic Aspects of Constructive Type The-
        ory. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2008.
[War10] M. Warren. The strict omega-groupoid interpretation of type theory.
        2010. Forthcoming.
