A TYPE THEORY FOR SYNTHETIC ∞ -CATEGORIES 7
1 cube
I cube J cube
I × J cube
(t :I) ∈ Ξ
Ξ ⊢ t :I Ξ ⊢ ⋆ : 1
Ξ ⊢ s :I Ξ ⊢ t :J
Ξ ⊢ ⟨s,t ⟩ :I × J
Ξ ⊢ t :I × J
Ξ ⊢ π1(t) : I
Ξ ⊢ t :I × J
Ξ ⊢ π2(t) : J
Figure 1. The cube layer
We introduce our basic type theory with shapes in §2, and specialize to the
simplicial type theory using the strict interval in §3. In §4 we prove some basic
results about extension types and how they commute with each oth er and with the
other type constructors.
Then in §5 we give the basic deﬁnition of a Segal type and study is structure as
a sort of “category”, while in §6 we study the corresponding behavior of “functors”
and “natural transformations”. Section 7 is devoted to a special kind of Segal type
that we call “discrete”; semantically these correspond to homoto pically constant
simplicial spaces; if Segal and Rezk types are the “categories”, dis crete types are
the “groupoids”. Then in §8 we study covariant and contravariant type families,
which are families of discrete types that vary functorially over a Seg al type; these
are the synthetic analogue of covariant and contravariant ﬁbrat ions or presheaves.
In particular, they satisfy the Yoneda lemma, as we show in §9.
In §10 we deﬁne Rezk types, which are Segal types satisfying a “complete ness”
or “univalence” condition identifying the type-theoretic identity ty pe with the cate-
gorical isomorphisms. And in §11 we study homotopy coherent adjunctions between
Segal and Rezk types.
Finally, in Appendix A we brieﬂy discuss the motivating semantics in bisimpli-
cial sets and other “model categories with shapes”, and show tha t our Segal and
Rezk types correspond to Segal spaces and complete Segal spac es. The analogous
correspondence for covariant ﬁbrations follows from recent wor k of [ R V17, KV14,
dB16, Ras17].
The authors with to thank the anonymous referee for a lengthy list of cogent
suggestions and Arthur Azevedo de Amorim for catching a number o f typos and
imprecisions in the syntax for our type theory with shapes.
2. Type theory with shapes
Our type theory has three layers. The ﬁrst two are basically ordina ry coherent
ﬁrst-order logic, in which we express the theory of a strict interva l; the third layer
is then a homotopy type theory over the ﬁrst two. For clarity and g enerality, in this
section we describe only the formal apparatus of the type theory ; in §3 we will then
add to it the axioms of a strict interval that we will use in the rest of t he paper.
2.1. Cubes, topes, shapes, and types. The ﬁrst layer is a simple intuitionistic
type theory with ﬁnite product types and nothing else. We call the t ypes in this
layer cubes; in our theory they will be ﬁnite powers of the one “generating cube ”
2. The formal rules for the cube layer are shown in Figure 1; here Ξ is a context of
variables belonging to cubes.